1 Game Parameters
1.1 TEAMS
1.1.1 At most, 14 Skaters may be on the roster for a specific game.
1.2 TRACK
1.2.1 For regulation inter-league games, the track will be based on the specifications
in Appendix A. The method of marking dimensions (tape, rope, etc.), including
suggested 10-foot (3-meter) marks, is subject to the restrictions of the venue;
however, the track must be the standardized dimensions.
1.2.2 The track surface will be clean, flat, and suitable for roller skating. Acceptable
surfaces include polished or painted concrete, wood, or game court floors.
1.2.2.1 The skating surface and boundary line colors must meet the definition
of “high contrast” beyond a reasonable doubt to the satisfaction of
the Head Referee. The skating surface and boundary line colors are of
high contrast if there is a large degree of visual difference between the
boundary line and the base color of the skating surface such that the
boundary line color stands out from the skating surface.
1.2.3 The track boundaries must be marked by a raised boundary at least 1/4 inch (0.64
cm) and no more than 2 inches (5 cm) in height, in such a way that is highly
visible to Skaters and Officials and does not present a safety hazard to Skaters. The
track boundary line width must be at least 1 inch (2.54 cm) and no greater than
3 inches (7.5 cm). The track boundary must be consistent in height and width
throughout the entire boundary.
1.2.3.1 The track must clearly demarcate the Pivot and Jammer Lines. They will
both be on the same straightaway, with the Pivot Line exactly 30 feet
(9.15 meters) counter-clockwise from the Jammer Line. These lines must
be consistent in background color throughout the length and width of
the line and must be at least 1 inch (2.54 cm) and no greater than 3
inches (7.5 cm) in width. Sponsor logos are permitted on the Pivot and
Jammer Lines as long as the logo does not interfere with the contrast of
the line to the skating surface.
1.2.4 The track area will include chairs or benches in designated team areas, either
in the infield or on the sidelines. Only those Skaters who are on the roster for that
game, plus up to two support staff per team, may sit or stand in the designated
team area.
Page 2

1.2.5 There will be a 10-foot (3-meter) clearance around the outside of the track for
safety. If there is a rail, wall, or barrier between the track and the audience that
completely prevents contact between spectators and contestants, a 5-foot
(1.5-meter) clearance is permissible. Referees may skate in this area, and/or the
infield of the track. The clearance cannot be less than 5 feet (1.5 meters).
1.2.6 For safety and visibility, the track surface, boundaries, safety zone, and Penalty Box
must be clearly lit.
1.2.7 The track and the boundary marker line are considered in bounds.
1.3 STRUCTURE
1.3.1 A game is composed of 60 minutes of play divided into two periods of 30 minutes
played between two teams.
1.3.1.1 There will be a break of at least five minutes between periods.
1.3.2 The team with the most points at the end of the game wins.
1.4 PERIODS
1.4.1 The period begins when the designated Official blows the jam-starting whistle.
1.4.2 The period ends when the last jam reaches its natural conclusion (see Section 1.5 -
Jams). This may extend past the point when the Official Period Clock reaches 0:00.
1.4.3 If 30 seconds or fewer remain on the Official Period Clock when a jam ends, there
will not be another jam started for that period unless a timeout or Official Review is
called by one of the teams (see Section 1.7 - Timeouts).
1.4.3.1 If an Official Timeout is taken with 30 seconds or fewer remaining on the
Official Period Clock, it will begin running once again when the designated
Official indicates that the Official Timeout is complete.
1.5 JAMS
1.5.1 A period is divided into multiple jams. There is no limit to the number of jams
allowed in each period.
1.5.2 A jam may last up to two minutes. Jams begin at the jam-starting whistle and end
on the fourth whistle of the jam-ending signal (see Section 1.10 - Whistles).
1.5.3 There are 30 seconds between jams.
Page 3

1.5.4 Any Skaters who are not completely in bounds at the jam-starting whistle will not be
permitted to join the jam in progress. No penalty will be issued.
1.5.5 Jammers and Pivots are permitted to put on their helmet covers after the jam
has started. They must, however, have their helmet cover on their head or in hand
before the jam-starting whistle. A helmet cover cannot enter a jam in progress.
1.5.6 The jam is over when an Official calls it off with four short whistle blasts. The jam
ends on the fourth whistle, whether or not the whistles were inadvertent or incorrect.
1.6 OVERTIME
1.6.1 A game may never end in a tie score. If the score is tied at the end of a game,
an overtime jam will determine the winner. After one minute, the teams will skate
a full two-minute jam. This jam will have no Lead Jammer. Penalties will be called.
Jammers will begin scoring points on their initial pass. The team with the most
points at the end of the overtime jam is the winner. If the score remains tied,
additional overtime jams will be played until the tie is broken. Additional overtime
jams will begin one minute after the end of the previous jam.
1.6.1.1 If an overtime jam ends before two minutes for any reason, the game
ends immediately and the score stands. Additional overtime jams will
only be played if the score remains tied (with the exception in
Section 8.2.6.3).
1.6.2 Overtime is not a new period. Overtime is an extension of the final period.
1.7 TIMEOUTS
1.7.1 Each team is allowed three one-minute timeouts per game.
1.7.2 To take a timeout, the Captain or Designated Alternate will signal the Officials to
request a timeout. Officials will signal for the clock to stop.
1.7.3 Teams may take timeouts only between jams.
1.7.3.1 The designated Official will signal the end of the timeout at its conclusion.
At this signal, Skaters will return to the track so as to start the next jam as
soon as possible. The next jam can start as soon as Skaters are lined up,
but no more than 30 seconds should elapse after a timeout.
1.7.4 Officials may call an Official Timeout at any point. This will stop the clock so that
Officials have time to review a call or adjust the number of Skaters on the floor
(see Section 1.9.2.2).
1.7.4.1 If the Officials call a timeout during a jam in progress, the jam will end
and a new jam will be run if there is time remaining on the Official Period
Clock (see Sections 1.4.3 and 8.2.6.3). 
Page 4

1.7.5 After a timeout, the Official Period Clock does not resume until the next jam starts,
except as specified in Section 1.4.3.1.
1.8 PENALTY BOX
1.8.1 The Penalty Box Area is the designated area where penalty time will be served.
Benches or seats must be provided as part of the Penalty Box. The benches or
seats must be capable of accommodating a total of six Skaters (three from
each team).
1.8.1.1 Teams may use separate Penalty Boxes.
1.8.2 The Penalty Box Area must be situated in an easily accessible, neutral area close to
the track.
1.9 DISPLAYING GAME INFORMATION
1.9.1 Each game will have separate penalty clocks, jam clocks, and period clocks.
1.9.2 Official Period Clock
1.9.2.1 The Official Period Clock starts on the jam-starting whistle of the first jam.
1.9.2.2 The Official Period Clock does not stop between jams unless a timeout is
called. The period clock stops during a timeout.
1.9.2.3 Officials must stop the Official Period Clock between jams when time
exceeds 30 seconds. This will be considered an Official Timeout.
1.9.2.4 The Official Period Clock must be one that is highly visible to Referees,
teams, and audience members.
1.9.2.5 In the event of a malfunction or discrepancy, the Official Period Clock may
be updated during a timeout in between jams, based on a backup clock.
1.9.3 Official Jam Clock
1.9.3.1 The Official Jam Clock starts on the jam-starting whistle.
1.9.3.2 The Official Jam Clock stops at the end of each jam (on the fourth jamending
whistle).
1.9.3.3 The Official Jam Clock must be one that is highly visible to Referees,
teams, and audience members.
1.9.4 Penalty Clocks
1.9.4.1 All penalty clocks stop between jams (see Section 6.2.3 for procedure).
Page 5

1.9.4.2 Penalty clocks are not required to be visible to Referees, teams, or
audience members. While in the Penalty Box, Skaters may request
knowledge of how much penalty time they have remaining.
1.9.5 Score
1.9.5.1 The Official Score must be highly visible to Officials, Skaters, and audience
members.
1.10 WHISTLES
1.11 OFFICIAL REVIEWS
1.11.1 Official Review: A team may request the attention of the Officials.
1.11.1.1 To request an Official Review, in between jams or immediately following
the conclusion of the last jam of the period, the Captain or Designated
Alternate will signal the Officials with the appropriate hand signal.
Officials will signal for the clock to stop.
1.11.1.1.1 The Official Period Clock will remain stopped for a minimum of
60 seconds.
1.11.1.2 During the Official Review, the Head Referee will conference with both
teams’ Captains and/or Designated Alternates.
1.11.1.3 During the Official Review, the Captain and/or Designated Alternate
requesting the review may request to have an Official’s decision reviewed.
If such a request is made:
1.11.1.3.1 Decisions made during the prior jam may be reviewed, as
may decisions made during the lineup time prior to that jam.
Decisions made during the final jam may also be reviewed,
but only until the score has been declared final.
1.11.1.3.2 Decisions outside the purview of The Rules of Flat Track Roller
Derby may not be reviewed.
1.11.1.3.3 The Head Referee will then investigate the review with the
other Officials, and use the information gathered to render a
decision on the item under review, as well as related decisions.
DESCRIPTION WHISTLE SIGNAL
Jam-Starting Whistle One short
Lead Jammer Two rapid
Penalty One long
Timeout (Team or Official) Called Four rapid
Timeout Ended Long rolling
Jam Called Off/Ended Four rapid
Period/Game Ended Long rolling
Page 6

1.11.1.3.4 The Head Referee will announce a decision. This decision is
final.
1.11.1.4 If the Captain or Designated Alternate does not request that a decision
be reviewed, they may use this 60-second period (see Section 1.11.1.1.1)
as they please.
1.11.2 A team is guaranteed one Official Review per period.
1.11.2.1 If, during a team’s first Official Review of the period, a review of an
Official’s decision is requested and the Head Referee determines that an
officiating error was made in relation to the objection, the team will retain
its Official Review.
1.11.2.2 If the Captain or Designated Alternate does not request review of
a decision according to Section 1.11.1.4, or if upon review it was
determined that no officiating error occurred, their team will not retain
its Official Review.
2 Skater POSITIONS AND IDENTIFICATION
Skater positions refer to the position a Skater is playing during a jam, A Skater is not limited in the
number of positions that Skater may play during a game, but is limited to playing one designated
position at a time. A maximum of four Blockers and one Jammer from each team are allowed on
the track during play; only one of the Blockers may be a Pivot Blocker (see Section 2.2 - Pivot Blocker
and Section 2.3 - Jammer).
2.1 BLOCKER
2.1.1 Blockers are positional Skaters who form the pack. There can be four Blockers from
each team, one of whom may be a Pivot Blocker. Blockers never score points.
2.1.2 Prior to the start of a jam, Blockers line up behind the Pivots (if a Pivot is
upright and on the Pivot Line), and ahead of the Jammers (see Section 3.2 -
Pre-Jam Positioning).
2.1.3 Blocker Identification: Non-Pivot Blockers do not wear helmet covers. Blockers’
helmets may be of the same color as the base color of a team’s helmet covers,
but may not have any marks that might be confused with stripes or stars.
(Skater numbers are permitted on helmets per Section 2.7.5.2.)
2.2 PIVOT BLOCKER
2.2.1 A Pivot is a special subset of Blocker. A Pivot must be wearing the Pivot helmet
cover to have any of the Pivot position rights or privileges; otherwise, the Skater who
is holding the Pivot helmet cover is a Blocker with the only distinction being that 
Page 7

they can gain those rights and privileges by putting the Pivot helmet cover on. The
position of Pivot cannot be transferred. It is not mandatory to field a Pivot Blocker.
2.2.1.1 A Pivot Blocker’s privileges include:
2.2.1.1.1 Prior to the start of a jam, Pivots may line up on the Pivot Line,
as specified in Section 3.2.2 - Pivot Starting Position.
2.2.1.1.2 In certain circumstances, a Pivot may take over the position
of Jammer for their team according to the specifications in
Section 2.5 - Passing the Star.
2.2.2 The Pivot’s helmet cover must have a single, solid stripe a minimum of 2 inches (5 cm)
wide running from front to back. Helmet cover base color and stripe must be of
high contrast and easily identifiable.
2.2.2.1 If the Pivot helmet cover falls to the ground or is removed from play for
any reason, it may only be recovered by the Pivot.
2.2.2.2 A Skater lined up in the Pivot starting position will not be considered a
Pivot unless the Skater is wearing a Pivot helmet cover with a visible stripe.
2.3 JAMMER
2.3.1 The Jammer’s role is to score points for their team per the specifications in
Section 7 - Scoring. Each team is permitted one Jammer per jam. Prior to the start of
a jam, Jammers line up on or behind the Jammer Line as specified in Section 3.2.4 -
Jammer Starting Position.
2.3.1.1 A Jammer’s privileges include:
2.3.1.1.1 A Jammer may earn Lead Jammer and so become the only
Skater with the privilege of calling off (ending) the jam prior
to the expiration of the full two minutes (see Section 2.4 -
Lead Jammer).
2.3.1.1.2 A Jammer may pass their position to the team’s Pivot according
to the specifications in Section 2.5 - Passing the Star.
2.3.2 Jammer Identification: A Skater who is serving a penalty from a prior jam in the
position of Jammer will be identified as the Jammer for their team. If no such Skater
exists, a Skater in possession of the Jammer helmet cover will be identified as the
Jammer for their team. If no such Skater exists, one single Skater who is lined up in
the Jammer Starting Position will be determined by the Jammer Referee to be the
Jammer for their team. If no such Skater exists, that team is not considered to have
fielded a Jammer for that jam.
2.3.2.1 A Skater who has been identified as the Jammer for their team who is not
wearing a helmet cover is considered an inactive Jammer (see Section
2.3.3).
Page 8

2.3.2.2 The Jammer’s helmet cover must have two stars that are a minimum of 4
inches (10 cm) across, from point to point. Helmet cover base color and
stars must be of high contrast and easily identifiable.
2.3.2.3 Only the Jammer’s helmet cover may have stars on it or any marks that
might be confused with stars.
2.3.3 An inactive Jammer is any Jammer who is not wearing the Jammer helmet cover
with the stars visible, for any reason. An inactive Jammer has the advantage of
all Jammer abilities except scoring points (see Section 7 - Scoring) and earning
Lead Jammer status (see Section 2.4 - Lead Jammer). Inactive Jammers are not
considered Blockers.
2.4 LEAD JAMMER
2.4.1 The Lead Jammer is the only Skater who has the privilege of calling off (ending)
the jam prior to the expiration of the full two minutes. Lead Jammer is a strategic
position established on the Jammers’ initial pass through the pack during each jam.
2.4.1.1 Lead Jammer status will be signaled immediately after it is earned
(see Section 2.4.2).
2.4.1.1.1 A Jammer must be in bounds to become Lead Jammer.
A Jammer does not have to stay in bounds to remain
Lead Jammer.
2.4.1.2 A Jammer must be ahead of the foremost in-play Blocker (as demarked
by the hips) and touching in bounds in order to become Lead Jammer.
2.4.1.3 Jammers do not need to pass Blockers ahead of the Engagement Zone
in order to become Lead Jammer.
2.4.1.4 During a No Pack situation (per Section 3.1.2), the Jammer must pass all
Blockers to become Lead Jammer.
2.4.2 In order to gain Lead Jammer status on the Jammers’ initial pass through the pack,
a Jammer must pass the foremost in-play Blocker legally, in bounds, and upright,
while wearing the Jammer helmet cover with the stars visible, having already
passed all other Blockers legally, in bounds, and upright, while wearing the Jammer
helmet cover with the stars visible. A Jammer who is in bounds but down may earn
a pass for opposing Blockers who were ahead of the Jammer but skate clockwise
behind the downed Jammer.
2.4.2.1 Any legal pass counts. If a Jammer becomes ineligible for Lead Jammer
by passing while out of bounds or while not wearing the helmet cover
with the stars visible, the Jammer is allowed an opportunity to re-pass
and regain eligibility for Lead Jammer status.
2.4.2.2 To remain eligible for Lead Jammer, a Jammer must remain in bounds
until they are within the Engagement Zone, the area in which the 
Page 9

Jammer may be legally engaged by a Blocker, during their initial pass.
In the event of a No Pack situation or no Engagement Zone, a Jammer
must remain in bounds until reaching within 20 feet (6 meters) of the
rearmost Blocker to remain eligible for Lead Jammer.
2.4.2.3 If the Jammer helmet cover is removed by an opponent’s action or
through the course of natural game play, the Jammer may replace the
helmet cover to regain eligibility for Lead Jammer (see Section 2.4.7).
2.4.2.4 Once a Jammer has completed their initial pass, that Jammer is no
longer eligible to re-pass. If the Jammer has not passed all of the Blockers
on both teams legally, in bounds, and upright, while wearing the Jammer
helmet cover with the stars visible, the Jammer will be declared Not Lead
Jammer at this point.
2.4.2.5 In the event that both Jammers simultaneously meet all requirements for
Lead Jammer, the foremost Jammer will be declared Lead Jammer.
2.4.2.6 See Sections 2.4.7 and 6.2.2.2.2 for further information on how a Skater
sent to the Penalty Box affects Lead Jammer.
2.4.3 A pass is determined by the Skaters’ hips (see Glossary for Pass and Hips).
2.4.4 Only one Jammer may be declared Lead Jammer during a jam. If the first Jammer
to emerge from the pack does not earn Lead Jammer status on their initial pass
through the pack, the second Jammer is eligible to become Lead Jammer,
provided that the second Jammer meets the specified requirements. If the second
Jammer also fails to earn Lead Jammer status on their initial pass through the
pack, there will be no Lead Jammer for that jam.
2.4.5 A Jammer who begins the jam in the Penalty Box is eligible to earn Lead Jammer
status provided that the other Jammer has not already been declared Lead
Jammer. A Jammer sent to the Penalty Box while making their initial pass through
the pack is not eligible to become Lead Jammer upon returning to the jam.
2.4.6 A Jammer who begins the jam with the Star in hand, but not on their head, is
eligible to earn Lead Jammer status (provided that the conditions in Section 2.4.2
are met).
2.4.7 The Lead Jammer may call off the jam at any time after their position has been
established unless the Jammer has been removed from the jam due to a penalty
or their helmet cover has been removed. If the helmet cover is removed by an
opponent’s action or in the course of natural game play, the Jammer may replace
the helmet cover and regain Lead Jammer status. The Lead Jammer calls off the
jam by repeatedly placing both hands on their hips until a Referee whistles the end
of the jam. The jam is not over until the Referee officially calls off the jam. If there is
no Lead Jammer, the jam will run until the full two-minute time limit expires.
2.4.8 Once a Jammer has been declared Lead Jammer, Lead Jammer status is retained
for the duration of the jam unless the status is forfeited. Lead Jammer status (if
obtained) and the ability to become Lead Jammer are forfeited by:
Page 10

2.4.8.1 The Jammer removing the helmet cover for any reason.
2.4.8.2 The Jammer being assessed a penalty.
2.4.8.3 The Jammer having their helmet cover intentionally removed by
a teammate.
2.5 PASSING THE STAR
A Jammer may transfer their position (i.e., the status of being the Jammer, or “Jammer
Status”) to their team’s Pivot, allowing said Pivot to become the point-scoring Skater for their
team for the remainder of the jam. This is commonly referred to as “Passing the Star.” Only
the position of Jammer, and not the status of Lead Jammer, may be transferred to the Pivot.
A Pivot-turned-Jammer can score points, but cannot gain Lead Jammer status.
2.5.1 Pass Procedure: In order to transfer Jammer Status to the Pivot, a Jammer must
hand their helmet cover (the “Star”) to the Pivot. (Removing the Star will make the
Jammer inactive; see Section 2.3.3.) The Pivot must be grasping the Star when the
Jammer releases it. Upon the Jammer releasing the Star, Jammer Status has been
transferred: the Pivot will be considered the Jammer, and the prior Jammer will be
considered a Blocker. They retain these new roles until the end of the jam.
2.5.1.1 Jammer Status may only be transferred by a Jammer who releases the
Star while in the Engagement Zone, to a Pivot who is also within the
Engagement Zone. It is illegal to transfer the Star while either the Jammer
or Pivot is outside of the Engagement Zone, down, or out of bounds. This
applies only to the moment of transfer (i.e., the Jammer’s release of the
Star into the grasping Pivot’s hand).
2.5.1.2 All rules regarding inactive Jammers apply. The initial Jammer is inactive
as soon as they have removed the Star, and the Pivot-turned-Jammer is
inactive until they have put the Star on with the stars visible.
2.5.1.3 Jammer Status may not be transferred by handing off the Star via other
Skaters, or throwing or dropping the Star.
2.5.1.4 Jammers may not pass the Star while en route to or in the Penalty Box.
2.5.1.4.1 Jammers may pass the Star upon returning to play from the
Penalty Box.
2.5.1.5 Jammers may not pass the Star to a Pivot who has been directed to or is
in queue for the Penalty Box.
2.5.2 If the Star is passed illegally, Jammer Status is not transferred, even if the Pivot has
sole possession of the Star. Both Skaters retain their original status, and the initiator
of the pass is penalized accordingly (see Section 5.13 - Illegal Procedures).
2.5.3 A Star Pass may be blocked by the opposing team by any means of legal blocking.
Page 11

2.5.4 Incomplete Star Passes and Recovery: If the Star falls to the ground for any reason
or is removed from play by any means, it may only be recovered by the Jammer
or Pivot.
2.5.4.1 If the Pivot recovers the Star in this manner, it does not transfer Jammer
Status. As such, the Pivot may not place it on their own helmet. Doing so
will be considered illegal initiation of a Star Pass. The Pivot may return it
to the inactive Jammer via a hand-off, throwing, or dropping, but not via
other Skaters.
2.5.4.2 When the inactive Jammer is once again grasping the Star, said Jammer
may immediately release it back into possession of the Pivot, so long as
the other requirements of Section 2.5.1 - Pass Procedure are met. Such an
action constitutes a valid transfer of Jammer Status.
2.5.4.3 If a Star Pass cannot be completed for any reason, the Jammer may
return the Star to their own helmet and regain active Jammer Status.
2.5.5 A Pivot who has just become the Jammer is now subject to all rules per Section
7 - Scoring. The Pivot picks up where the previous Jammer left off (i.e., on the same
pass, having scored points on the same Blockers during that pass).
2.6 HELMET COVERS
2.6.1 Teams must have two sets of differently colored helmet covers available during
the game. A team’s helmet cover colors must meet the definition of high contrast
beyond a reasonable doubt to the satisfaction of the Head Referee, or the covers
may not be worn. The Jammer and/or Pivot helmet cover colors are of high
contrast if there is a large degree of visual difference between the star/stripe color
and the base color of the cover such that the star/stripe color stands out from the
base color.
2.6.2 A team’s helmet covers are easily identifiable if they can be readily distinguished by
Officials, other Skaters, and audience members from the helmets of the Blockers on
the track.
2.6.3 All helmet covers used by one team must be of the same color scheme (e.g., a
team cannot use black base and yellow star/stripe in one jam then yellow base
and black star/stripe in the next jam, or mix color schemes in the same jam).
2.6.4 An opposing team may challenge the use of a team’s helmet covers if they
feel there could be confusion in distinguishing between Jammers, Pivots, and
other Blockers.
2.6.4.1 In the event of a challenge by the opposing team that meets the above
standard, the Head Referee must require use of the alternate color
helmet covers. If a team’s helmet cover colors are not identical but very
similar, the Head Referee may enforce the helmet cover switch, but is not
required to.
2.6.4.2 No helmets’ decorations, including numbers, should be able to be
mistaken for a Jammer star or Pivot stripe. In the event of a challenge by
the opposing team that meets this standard, the offending symbols on
said helmet must be removed or covered.
2.6.5 If a helmet cover falls to the ground or is removed from play by any means, a
qualified Skater (e.g., the Jammer or Pivot) may skate out of bounds to recover it,
but only if the helmet cover is itself touching out of bounds. They are still subject to
Out of Play and Out of Bounds Engagement penalties.
2.6.6 Helmet covers must be on a qualified Skater’s head, or in a qualified Skater’s hand,
before the jam-starting whistle. Helmet covers cannot enter a jam in progress.
2.6.7 Helmet covers may not be removed mid-jam by anybody (including teammates
and opponents) except the Skater holding the position designated by said
helmet cover.
2.6.7.1 It is legal to remove a teammate’s helmet cover if the designation
provided by the cover is in error. For example, if a team fields two Pivots, a
teammate may remove one Pivot’s helmet cover.
2.7 UNIFORMS
2.7.1 Each member of a respective team participating in a game must wear a uniform
that clearly identifies that Skater as a member of their team.
2.7.1.1 All uniforms must be in good repair and may not cause a hazard to
other Skaters. All patches and numbers must be securely fastened to
said uniform. Safety pins or tape are not permitted to attach or modify
numbers to a uniform. Tape is allowed on helmets, pads, and jewelry;
safety pins are never allowed.
2.7.2 The team Captain must visibly display a “C” on their uniform or arm. The team
Captain’s Designated Alternate must visibly display an “A” on their clothing, uniform,
or arm.
2.7.2.1 If the Captain is not able to skate the remainder of the game due to
expulsion, fouling out, injury, or emergency, the team has the option to
name a new Captain.
2.7.2.1.1 In the instances where the rules call for a Captain to serve a
penalty, and a team has not designated a Captain, the team
may designate a new Captain at that time. Only if the team
refuses to designate a Captain, the Head Referee will select
the Skater to be designated Captain for the remainder of the
game and serve any applicable penalties.
2.7.2.2 A team may not select a new Designated Alternate (skating or nonskating)
should the Designated Alternate be unable to skate, coach, or
manage the remainder of the game.
Page 13

2.7.3 Skater names on uniforms are optional.
2.7.4 Each Skater participating in a game must visibly display their roster number on the
back of their uniform.
2.7.4.1 Each Skater’s roster number must be unique with relation to their own
team.
2.7.4.2 All characters in the roster number must be at least 4 inches (10 cm) tall
so that they are legible and large enough to be read by Officials who are
positioned anywhere within the track or on its boundaries.
2.7.4.3 A Skater’s roster number must be of a readable font. A number is of
readable font if it can be easily read and distinguished from the other
Skaters’ numbers by the Officials, other Skaters, and audience members.
2.7.4.4 A Skater’s roster number may contain up to four characters.
2.7.4.5 A Skater’s roster number may include only modern Arabic numerals and
Latin letters (uppercase or lowercase, but see Section 2.7.4.2), without
accents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
2.7.4.6 A Skater’s roster number must have at least one digit. For example, L5 is
an acceptable roster number, but LV is not.
2.7.4.7 A Skater may have small characters preceding or following their roster
number on their uniform (e.g., 55mph, where “mph” is considerably
smaller than 55). These small characters are not considered part of
the Skater’s roster number and they may not inhibit the legibility of
the Skater’s roster number whatsoever. The maximum size for the small
characters is 2 inches (5 cm).
2.7.4.8 Skaters on the same team may not have identical numbers. For example,
two Skaters may not both wear L5, but one may wear L5 and another
may wear J5 (see also Section 2.7.4.2).
2.7.4.9 A team’s uniform numbers must meet the definition of high contrast
beyond a reasonable doubt to the satisfaction of the Head Referee.
2.7.4.10 A team’s uniform numbers are of high contrast if there is a large degree
of visual difference between the color of the number and the base color
of the uniform, such that the number significantly stands out from the
base color of the uniform.
2.7.5 Each Skater participating in a game must visibly display their roster number on
each sleeve or arm. Roster numbers must be of high contrast and easily legible.
Handwritten numbers on the arm are acceptable.
2.7.5.1 Roster numbers may be placed on the hip or thigh in addition to the
arm/sleeve. Numbers on hips or thighs must match roster numbers.
2.7.5.2 Roster numbers may be placed on the helmet in addition to the arm/
sleeve. Numbers on helmets must match roster numbers.
Page 14

2.7.5.3 The minimum height for a Skater’s roster number on the arm/sleeve is 2
inches (5 cm).
2.7.5.4 The maximum height for a Skater’s roster number on the arm/sleeve is 4
inches (10 cm).
2.8 JEWELRY
2.8.1 Jewelry may be worn during the game unless deemed a safety hazard by the Referees.
It is recommended that jewelry be taped or removed. Jewelry must not interfere
with play or cause danger to other Skaters. Jewelry is worn at the risk of the wearer.
2.9 SKATES
2.9.1 Skaters must wear quad roller skates only. Skaters may not wear inline or any other
type of skate.
3 THE PACK
3.1 PACK DEFINITION
3.1.1 The pack is defined by the largest group of in-bounds and upright Blockers in
proximity and containing members from both teams.
3.1.1.1 The Jammers are not part of the pack.
3.1.1.2 Proximity is defined as not more than 10 feet (3 meters) (as measured
from the hips) in front of or behind the nearest pack Skater.
3.1.1.3 In order to form a pack, a team must have at least one Blocker on the
track at all times.
3.1.2 When two or more groups of Blockers equal in number are on the track, are more
than 10 feet (3 meters) from one another, and no single group meets the pack
definition, no pack can be defined. Skaters will be issued a penalty for intentionally
creating a No Pack situation, or destroying the pack (see Section 5.10.2). Both
teams are responsible for maintaining a legally defined pack. A Skater or group of
Skaters is always responsible for the consequences of their actions. If their actions
create a No Pack situation (except those covered in Section 5.10.2.3), they should
be penalized as directed in Sections 5.10.11 – 5.10.21.
3.1.2.1 Distances for determining the pack and the Engagement Zone are
measured as the shortest distance parallel to the inside track boundary
between Skaters’ hips (see Glossary for Hips).
Page 15

3.2 PRE-JAM POSITIONING
3.2.1 At the start of a jam, all Skaters must be in position with the Blockers in front of the
Jammers (see Section 2.1.2).
3.2.1.1 Blockers are in position if they are between the Jammer Line and the
Pivot Line (measured counter-clockwise) at the start of the jam. No
Blockers may be touching the Jammer Line, and only the Pivots may
be touching the Pivot Line when the jam starts. Blockers must be in a
position, at the start of the jam, such that a pack exists behind the Pivot
Line and in front of the Jammer Line either at or immediately after the
jam-starting whistle.
3.2.1.1.1 It is required that more than half of the on-the-track Blockers
from each team begin in this pre-jam positioning. An Illegal
Procedure penalty will be assessed to the Pivot in that jam of
the team(s) that did not field enough Blockers in proper prejam
position (see Section 5.13.8.2).
3.2.1.1.1.1 If all of one team’s Blockers are lined up out of
position per Section 3.2.1.1, a Delay of Game
penalty should be issued when the 30 seconds
between jams has expired (see Section 5.15.6).
3.2.1.2 At the jam-starting whistle, Blockers are permitted to be either upright or
down on one knee.
3.2.1.2.1 Blockers may not intentionally take starting positions that
purposefully prolong that Skater’s ability to return to an in-play
position or a team’s ability to reform a pack (e.g., intentionally
starting on one’s back, intentionally starting in a dog pile)
(see Section 5.13.25).
3.2.2 Pivot Starting Position: Only the Pivots may line up on the Pivot Line. Pivots are
considered on the Pivot Line when they are upright and also touching the line.
3.2.3 Non-Pivot Blocker Starting Positions: Blockers line up in any order behind the Pivots
as demarked by the hips. If a Pivot is not upright and on the Pivot Line, Non-Pivot
Blockers are not required to line up behind that Pivot.
3.2.4 Jammer Starting Position: Jammers may line up anywhere between the Jammer
Line and the Pivot Line (measured clockwise). Jammers may line up touching the
Jammer Line, but may not be touching the Pivot Line.
3.2.5 The pack and Jammers may begin rolling at the jam-starting whistle from the
designated Official.
3.2.6 Jammers may not be accelerating at the jam-starting whistle. They are, however,
permitted to be moving, coasting, or braking.
3.2.7 Skaters who line up completely outside of their legal starting area (but fully inside
the track boundary) will be issued a penalty (see Section 5.13.8).
Page 16

3.2.8 Skaters who line up fully in bounds but in an illegal starting position (while touching
their legal starting area) are considered to have committed a False Start, and will
receive a False Start warning. Once warned, Skaters who False Start must cease
all forward motion until they have yielded to all Skaters in the immediate vicinity
by ceding relative position to those Skaters, or they may be issued a penalty (see
Section 5.13.7).
3.2.8.1 If, after the warning, no Skaters are in the immediate vicinity of a Skater
who has false started (in the clockwise direction), the false-starting Skater
must come to a complete stop in order to yield. After yielding, they may
skate normally.
3.2.8.2 If a false-starting Skater attempts to cede relative position (by coming
to a stop), but no other Skaters make an attempt to take back said
advantage, the false-starting Skater is no longer required to yield.
3.2.8.3 Prior to yielding, a Blocker who has false started is not considered part of
the pack.
3.2.8.4 Prior to yielding, any Skaters passed by a false-starting Jammer do not
count towards earning Lead Jammer status.
3.3 JAM POSITIONING
3.3.1 During the jam, Skaters must remain in play. Skaters who leave play may not
engage, or be engaged, and must return to play. Skaters who engage while out of
play, or who do not return to play, may be subject to penalties specified in Section
5.10 - Out of Play.
3.3.1.1 Skaters who are out of play may legally counter-block.
3.3.2 Blockers must also maintain a pack at all times. When there is no pack, Blockers
must immediately act to form a pack, and may be penalized if they fail to do so.
Figure 1: In/Out of Play Example
• In the diagram, Group C is the pack as it is the largest group
of Blockers skating in proximity and containing members of
both teams.
• The two Blockers in Group B are not part of the pack because
they are more than 10 feet (3 meters) from the nearest pack
Skater, but are still considered “in play” as they are within 20
feet (6 meters) of the nearest pack Skater.
• The two Blockers in Group A are considered “out of play”
since they are more than 20 feet (6 meters) from the nearest
pack Skater. Skaters in Group A will be warned that they are
out of play and will be penalized if they do not immediately
thereafter attempt to return to the Engagement Zone. If they
block or assist, they may also receive Out of Play penalties, regardless
of whether they have been warned (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play).
11 feet
 3.3 m
A
B
C
 3.3 m
11 feet
Page 17

3.3.3 Blockers who are out of play will receive an Out of Play warning from a Referee. At
this point, the Blocker must immediately attempt to return to play.
3.3.3.1 While outside of the Engagement Zone, a Blocker must yield the right of
way to the opposing Jammer by physically moving out of the Jammer’s
path. Any engagement, including passive/positional blocking, may
result in a penalty. A warning is not required before issuing a penalty for
blocking while out of play (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play).
3.3.3.2 A Blocker who is out of play must return to the Engagement Zone in the
opposite way that Blocker left.
3.3.3.2.1 If the Blocker exited the front of the Engagement Zone, that
Blocker must drop back to legally return to play.
3.3.3.2.2 To regain position after having fallen behind, a Blocker must
return to the back of the Engagement Zone by skating within
the track boundaries to legally return to play.
3.3.3.2.3 Any Blocker who returns to the Engagement Zone in an illegal
manner, such as lapping the pack or being lapped by the
pack, is subject to penalties (see Sections 5.10.14 and 5.10.15).
3.3.4 If no pack can be defined, all Blockers will receive a No Pack warning from a
Referee. At this point, all Blockers must immediately attempt to reform the pack.
3.3.5 Jammers are in play whenever they are upright and in bounds.
3.3.5.1 If an out-of-play opposing Blocker initiates contact with a Jammer, the
Jammer may legally counter-block.
3.3.5.2 If a Jammer initiates contact with an out-of-play opposing Blocker, the
Blocker may legally counter-block.
3.3.6 Skaters may not engage, or be engaged, while out of bounds (except where
specified in Section 5.8 - Out of Bounds Engagement).
3.3.7 Skaters may not engage, or be engaged, while down (except where specified in
Section 5.3 - Low Blocking and Section 5.16 - Misconduct/Gross Misconduct).
3.3.8 Skaters may leave play mid-jam by removing themselves from the track, in order
to remain safe. This includes but is not limited to a Skater leaving the track due to
injury, or to adjust or reposition the Skater’s safety equipment or skates. Skaters who
exit the track for other reasons may be subject to penalties under Section 5.12 -
Skating Out of Bounds.
3.3.9 Airborne Skaters retain their prior in-bounds,out-of-bounds, or straddling status until
they land. Note that passes achieved while airborne do not count towards gaining
lead, and do not earn points, unless the Skater also lands in bounds (see Section
7.1.3.3).
Page 18

4 BLOCKING
4.1 GENERAL BLOCKING
4.1.1 “Blocking” refers to any physical contact made to an opponent, and to any
movement or placement of one’s body to impede said opponent’s speed or
movement (even if no contact is made; this is considered “positional blocking”).
This only includes actions and positioning taken during a jam (though other forms
of contact may be illegal even if not committed during a jam).
4.1.1.1 Counter-blocking is any motion/movement toward an oncoming block
by the receiving Skater. Counter-blocking is blocking.
4.1.1.2 Only Skaters who are in play (as defined in Figure 1: In/Out of Play
Example) may skate in front of an opponent to impede the opponent’s
movement on the track. Positional blocking need not include contact.
4.1.1.3 Only Skaters who are stepping and/or skating in the counter-clockwise
direction may execute a block. It is illegal to block while at a standstill
or while moving in the clockwise direction (see Section 5.9 - Direction of
Game Play). This includes positional blocking.
4.1.1.4 It is legal to block opponents who are standing on the track.
4.1.1.5 It is legal to block opponents who are skating and/or stepping clockwise
or counter-clockwise on the track.
4.1.1.6 Contact made to teammates is not “blocking.”
4.1.1.7 Blocking need not be “intentional.” Any action or actions that meet the
above description are considered blocking, even if accidental.
4.1.2 The Skater who initiates contact to an opponent is considered the initiator of a
block. The initiator of a block is always responsible for the legality of their contact.
4.1.2.1 All contact between opponents has an initiator.
4.1.2.2 It is possible for both Skaters to be considered initiators.
4.1.3 A Skater who is in play, in bounds, and stepping and/or skating (i.e., not down or at
a standstill) in the counter-clockwise direction may block or engage an opponent
at any time during the jam after the jam-starting whistle has blown (see Section 5.9 -
Direction of Game Play).
Page 19

4.2 BLOCKING AND TARGET ZONES
Contact between opponents is limited to legal blocking zones and legal target zones.
4.2.1 Legal Target Zones: A Skater may be hit in the following locations:
4.2.1.1 The arms and hands
4.2.1.2 The chest, front, and side of the torso
4.2.1.3 The hips
4.2.1.4 The mid and upper thigh (including the inner portion)
4.2.2 Illegal Target Zones: For safety reasons, a Skater may not be hit in the
following locations:
4.2.2.1 Above the shoulders
4.2.2.2 The back of the torso, back of the buttocks, or back of the thigh
4.2.2.3 Below mid-thigh
4.2.3 Legal Blocking Zones apply to the body parts of the Skater performing a block.
Skaters may initiate contact with the following parts of the body:
4.2.3.1 The arm from the shoulder to the elbow
4.2.3.2 The torso
4.2.3.3 The hips and buttocks
4.2.3.4 The mid and upper thigh (including the inner portion)
4.2.4 Illegal Blocking Zones apply to the body parts of the Skater performing a block.
Skaters may not initiate contact with the following parts of the body:
4.2.4.1 The elbows
4.2.4.2 The forearms and hands
4.2.4.3 The head
4.2.4.4 Below mid-thigh
Page 20

Figure 2: Legal Target and Blocking Zones
Legal Target Zones: The shaded regions are the legal areas to block an opponent.
Legal Blocking Zones: The shaded regions are the legal areas with which a Skater can block.
5 PENALTIES
A penalty is a punishment, handicap, or loss of advantage imposed on a team or competitor for
a rule infraction or a foul. Penalties are applied to both a Skater and the position that Skater is
currently playing. Skaters and teams are assessed penalties due to infractions.
Penalties and warnings are signaled and enforced by the Officials as they occur during a game
(see WFTDA Official Hand Signals for approved hand signals and WFTDA Officiating Verbal Cues for
approved verbal cues). Some infractions do not have sufficient impact on the game to warrant
a penalty.
Page 21

TYPES OF PENALTIES
The following penalties are addressed in detail in the sections listed below. These sections hold
specific examples that are to be followed explicitly. Illegal actions not specified below must be
penalized using these descriptions and examples as guidelines (see Section 8.3).
Contact to Illegal Target Zones
5.1 Blocking to the Back
5.2 Blocking to the Head/High Blocking
5.3 Low Blocking
Contact with Illegal Blocking Zones
5.4 Use of Elbows
5.5 Use of Forearms and Hands
5.6 Blocking with the Head
Illegal Blocking Penalties
5.7 Multi-Player Blocks
5.8 Out of Bounds Engagement
5.9 Direction of Game Play
5.10 Out of Play
Illegal Non-Contact Penalties
5.11 Cutting the Track
5.12 Skating Out of Bounds
5.13 Illegal Procedures
5.14 Insubordination
5.15 Delay of Game
Illegal Conduct
5.16 Misconduct/Gross Misconduct 
Page 22

5.1 BLOCKING TO THE BAC K
Hitting an opponent in the back of the torso, back of the legs, or back of the buttocks
is prohibited (see Section 4.2.2 - Illegal Target Zones). Hitting an opponent with a legal
blocking zone into a legal target zone while positioned behind said opponent is not
blocking to the back and is not necessarily illegal.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.1.1 Any contact to the back of an opponent that forces the receiving opponent off
balance, forward, and/or sideways, but does not cause any opponent to lose
relative position or any teammate (or the initiator) to gain relative position.
Penalty
5.1.2 Any contact to the back of an opponent that forces the receiving opponent out of
their established position. This includes forcing an opponent down, out of bounds,
or out of relative position.
5.1.3 Any contact to the back of an opponent that causes any opponent to lose relative
position, or the initiator or any teammate to gain relative position.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued for
a conscious and forceful attempt to block an opponent in the back egregiously, whether or
not the action was successful.
5.1.4 Negligent or reckless illegal contact to the back of an opponent, back of an
opponent’s legs, or back of an opponent’s buttocks.
5.2 BLOCKING TO THE HEAD/HIGH BLOCKING
Hitting an opponent above the shoulders is prohibited (see Section 4.2.2 - Illegal
Target Zones).
No Impact/No Penalty
5.2.1 Unintentional contact above the shoulders that is not forceful.
Penalty
5.2.2 Any block with forceful contact landing above the shoulders. 
Page 23

Expulsion
The following egregious acts making contact above the shoulders of an opponent will be
automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued for a conscious and forceful attempt
to commit any of the following egregious acts, whether or not the attempt was successful.
5.2.3 Any contact above the shoulders of an opponent not wearing a helmet.
5.2.4 Intentional, negligent, or reckless contact above the shoulders.
5.2.5 Pulling of the head, neck, or helmet.
5.3 LOW BLOCKING
Skaters may not trip or intentionally fall in front of an opponent. Any contact initiated
below the legal target zone that causes the opponent to stumble or fall is considered low
blocking. Downed Skaters returning to the track are subject to Low Blocking penalties even
on the first instance, even if the downed Skater has fallen small.
Examples of Legal Play
5.3.1 Contact between skates and wheels that is part of the normal skating motion.
5.3.2 A Skater who “falls small” in an effort to avoid low blocking, if no opponent’s relative
position is affected.
5.3.3 A downed Skater returning to the track who causes an opponent to stumble but
not fall or lose relative position.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.3.4 A Skater who “falls small” in an effort to avoid low blocking, affecting an opponent’s
relative position.
5.3.5 Any contact that lands below the legal target zone that causes an opponent to
stumble but not fall or lose relative position.
5.3.6 Any contact initiated with a part of the body below the legal blocking zone that
causes an opponent to stumble but not fall or lose relative position.
Penalty
5.3.7 Any contact outside of the normal skating motion that lands below the legal target
zone and causes an opponent to fall or lose relative position.
5.3.8 Any contact outside of the normal skating motion initiated with a part of the body
below the legal blocking/target zone that causes an opponent to fall or lose
relative position.
Page 24

5.3.9 Any contact initiated with or to any part of the body below the legal blocking/
target zone allowing the initiator or any teammate to gain position, or causing any
opponent to lose relative position.
5.3.10 Flailing and sprawling Skaters who low block an opponent, causing the recipient to
fall or lose relative position.
5.3.11 Habitual contact between skates and wheels that is part of the normal skating
motion that causes an opponent to stumble, fall, or lose relative position. The intent
is to penalize Skaters whose normal skating motion is dangerous to opponents.
A single Skater who repeatedly low blocks opponents, even in normal skating
motions, is adversely affecting game play and safety.
5.3.12 A Skater who habitually falls in front of opponents, causing them to stumble, fall, or
lose relative position, even if the Skater “falls small.” The intent is to penalize a Skater
who repeatedly falls as the Skater is a danger to opponents. A single Skater who
repeatedly low blocks opponents, even when “falling small,” is adversely affecting
game play and safety.
5.3.13 A downed Skater returning to the track who causes an opponent to fall or lose
relative position.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued for
a conscious attempt to low block an opponent, whether or not the action was successful.
5.3.14 Intentional tripping with feet or hands.
5.3.15 Slide tackling an opponent.
5.4 USE OF ELBOWS
5.4.1 When engaging an opponent, elbows may not be swung with a forward/
backward motion.
5.4.2 When engaging an opponent, elbows may not be swung with an upward or
downward motion.
5.4.3 The elbow must be bent while blocking with that arm.
5.4.4 Contact may not be made exclusively with the point of the elbow (i.e., jabbing).
5.4.5 Elbows may not be used to hook an opponent in any way (e.g., by wrapping one’s
arm around an opponent’s arm).
Page 25

No Impact/No Penalty
5.4.6 Any illegal contact with the elbow or swinging motion of the elbow that forces
the receiving opponent off balance, forward, and/or sideways but does not
cause the opponent to lose relative position or the initiator or teammate to gain
relative position.
Penalty
5.4.7 Any illegal swinging motion of the elbow or illegal elbow contact that causes
an opponent to lose relative position, or the initiator or a teammate to gain
relative position.
5.4.8 Use of an elbow or arm to pin or hook an opponent’s arm in a manner as to
impede the opponent’s mobility.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued
for a conscious and forceful attempt to elbow an opponent egregiously, whether or not
the action was successful.
5.4.9 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent by using the elbow in an
illegal manner.
5.5 USE OF FOREARMS AND HANDS
5.5.1 Forearms or hands may never be used to grab, hold, or push an opponent.
5.5.2 Incidental forearm or hand contact between opponents is acceptable.
Examples of Legal Play
5.5.3 Contact, including extended contact, made with forearms or hands that are pulled
into the body.
5.5.4 A block initiated with the shoulder, sending an opponent forwards or sideways, in
which there is either simultaneous or subsequent contact with forearms or hands.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.5.5 Illegal forearm or hand contact to an opponent that forces the receiving opponent
off balance, forward, and/or sideways but does not cause the opponent to lose
relative position or the initiator or a teammate to gain relative position. For example,
a slight but observable push with the hands or forearms.
Page 26

Penalty
5.5.6 Any illegal forearm or hand contact to an opponent that forces the receiving
opponent off balance, forward, and/or sideways and causes the opponent to lose
relative position.
5.5.7 Any illegal forearm or hand contact allowing the initiator or a teammate to gain
relative position, or causing an opponent to lose relative position.
5.5.8 Use of hands or forearms to grab, hold onto, or hold back an opponent, impeding
that opponent’s mobility.
5.5.9 Contact to an opponent, using the hands or forearms, in order to assist oneself in
blocking a different opponent.
5.5.10 Any pushing with the hands or forearms that significantly alters an opponent’s
established position, trajectory, or speed.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts using the forearms or hands will be automatic game
expulsions. Expulsions will be issued for a conscious and forceful attempt to commit any of
the following egregious acts, whether or not the attempt was successful.
5.5.11 Holding or pinning an opponent to the ground.
5.5.12 Shoving an opponent.
5.6 BLOCKING WITH THE HEAD
The head may not be used to block an opponent. Blocking with the head is dangerous
for the initiator and the receiver.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.6.1 Incidental contact by an initiator’s head, where the contact using the head
forces the receiving opponent off balance, forward, and/or sideways, but does
not cause an opponent to lose relative position or the initiator or a teammate to
gain relative position.
5.6.2 Positional blocking with the head.
Penalty
5.6.3 Incidental contact by the initiator’s head that forces the receiving opponent off
balance, forward, and/or sideways and causes an opponent to lose relative
position, or the initiator or teammate to gain relative position.
Page 27

5.6.4 Initiating a block with the head that includes physical contact, regardless of impact
or advantage.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued for
a conscious and forceful attempt to block an opponent with the head, whether or not the
action was successful.
5.6.5 Intentional, negligent, or reckless contact with an opponent by blocking with the
head in an illegal manner.
5.7 MULTI-PLAYER BLOCKS
Skaters often work together to execute more effective blocks on opponents. In some cases,
however, teammates working together can create an unfair advantage for themselves,
relative to an opponent who is trying to pass them, or an unsafe environment. As such, it is
illegal for teammates to prevent an opponent from passing them via grasping, linking, or
forming an impenetrable wall (see Glossary for Grasping, Linking, and Impenetrable).
Examples of Legal Play
5.7.1 Grasping a teammate, so long as an opponent is not physically impeded from
passing between said teammates due to the grasp.
5.7.2 Linking with a teammate, so long as an opponent is not physically impeded from
passing between said teammates due to the link.
5.7.3 Forming an impenetrable wall with a teammate, so long as an opponent is not
physically impeded from passing between said teammates.
5.7.4 Impeding an opponent, physically or not, by touching a teammate without
grasping or linking, so long as the wall is not impenetrable.
5.7.5 Initiating a block while linking, grasping, or as part of an impenetrable wall, so long
as an opponent is not impeded from passing between the connected teammates.
5.7.6 Positionally (but not physically) impeding an opponent using a link, grasp, or
impenetrable wall.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.7.7 Not applicable.
Penalty
5.7.8 Grasping a teammate in a manner that, upon a physical challenge by an
opponent, prevents said opponent from passing between said teammates.
Page 28

5.7.8.1 The penalty will be issued to the grasper. If both teammates are grasping,
the penalty will be issued to the grasper closest to the Referee.
5.7.9 Linking with a teammate in a manner that, upon a physical challenge by an
opponent, prevents said opponent from passing between said teammates.
5.7.9.1 The penalty will be issued to the initiator of the link. If neither Skater can
be identified as the initiator of the link, the penalty will be issued to the
linker closest to the Referee.
5.7.10 Two teammates forming an impenetrable wall that, upon a physical challenge by
an opponent, prevents said opponent from passing between said teammates.
5.7.10.1 The penalty will be issued to the Skater most responsible for the wall’s
impenetrability. If neither Skater can be identified as most responsible, the
penalty will be issued to the Skater closest to the Referee.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued
for a conscious and forceful attempt to block an opponent in an egregious manner while
forming a multi-player block.
5.7.11 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent while forming a multi-player block
in an illegal manner.
5.8 OUT OF BOUNDS ENGAGEMENT
5.8.1 Skaters must be in bounds when engaging other Skaters.
5.8.2 Skaters may not pick up momentum for a block until in bounds.
5.8.3 If a Skater forces an opponent out of bounds while blocking, the initiating
Skater must cease blocking before their own skates touch outside the track
boundary. No part of the initiating Skater’s skate may touch the ground outside the
track boundary.
5.8.4 A Skater who is in bounds need not yield right of way to any out-of-bounds Skater,
or make room for said out-of-bounds Skater to return in bounds.
5.8.5 A Skater may not initiate contact with an opponent who is completely outside the
track boundary.
5.8.6 An in-bounds Skater may block an opponent who is straddling.
5.8.7 Downed Skaters returning to the track are subject to Blocking Out of Bounds
penalties, even if the downed Skater has “fallen small.”
Page 29

Examples of Legal Play
5.8.8 Executing a block on an opponent who is straddling.
5.8.9 Continuing a block on a Skater who is completely out of bounds, so long as the
initiator is still in bounds.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.8.10 Any contact initiated by an out-of-bounds Skater that does not cause an opponent
to lose relative position, or the initiator or a teammate to gain relative position.
5.8.11 Continuing a block after the initiator has adopted an out-of-bounds (or straddling)
position, that does not cause an opponent to lose relative position, or the initiator
or a teammate to gain relative position.
5.8.12 Any contact with an opponent who is touching exclusively outside the track
boundary (i.e., an out-of-bounds opponent who is not straddling) that does not
affect the opponent’s upright status or ability to return to play.
5.8.13 Any contact to opponents initiated by a downed Skater returning to the track from
out of bounds that does not cause an opponent to lose relative position, or the
initiator or a teammate to gain relative position.
5.8.14 Any assist from out of bounds that does not cause the receiving teammate to
improve their relative position.
Penalty
5.8.15 Any contact or blocking initiated by an out-of-bounds Skater that causes the
receiving opponent to lose relative position, or allows the initiator or a teammate to
gain relative position.
5.8.16 Continuing a block that causes the receiving opponent to fall, where there is
continued blocking contact past the point where any part of the initiating Skater is
touching out of bounds.
5.8.17 A downed Skater returning to the track from out of bounds who forces any
opponents to lose relative position, or allows the initiator or a teammate to gain
relative position.
5.8.18 Initiating contact to an opponent who is completely out of bounds, that causes the
opponent to fall or affects the opponent’s ability to return to play.
5.8.19 Any assist by an out-of-bounds Skater that causes the receiving teammate to
improve their relative position.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsion. Expulsions will be issued
for a conscious and forceful attempt to block an out-of-bounds opponent in an
egregious manner.
Page 30

5.8.20 Negligent or reckless contact to an out-of-bounds opponent.
5.8.21 Initiating negligent or reckless contact to an opponent by a Skater who is out of
bounds.
5.9 DIRECTION OF GAME PLAY
5.9.1 Skaters must be skating and/or stepping in the counter-clockwise direction when
executing a block. Skaters may not skate in the clockwise direction while executing
a block. Skaters may not block while stopped on the track. These illegal blocking
techniques include positional blocking. Clockwise movement is measured by the
skates moving past a line perpendicular to the track boundaries.
5.9.2 Skaters must be skating and/or stepping in the counter-clockwise direction when
giving an assist. Skaters may not skate in the clockwise direction when giving or
receiving an assist. Skaters may not give assists to skating teammates while stopped
on the track. The initiator of the assist is responsible for the legality of the assist.
Clockwise movement is measured by the skates moving past a line perpendicular
to the track boundaries.
5.9.2.1 A stopped or counter-clockwise stepping/skating Skater may legally
assist a stopped or downed teammate.
5.9.3 Skaters are permitted to skate clockwise on the track provided they do not engage
with other Skaters (e.g., block opponents or assist teammates) .
5.9.4 Skaters are permitted to stop on the track provided they do not engage with other
Skaters (e.g., block opponents or assist teammates).
5.9.4.1 A Skater who is engaged in a block who then comes to a stop for
any reason must cease all engagement until there is another legal
opportunity to engage.
5.9.5 Skaters may skate clockwise out of bounds when exiting the Penalty Box, but must
return to play from the back of the pack (see Section 5.13 - Illegal Procedures).
5.9.6 Skaters may block and/or assist while their body is facing any direction as long as
they are moving in the counter-clockwise direction.
Examples of Legal Play
5.9.7 Skating in the clockwise direction in a way that does not affect other Skaters.
5.9.8 Skating clockwise while out of bounds in order to avoid a Cutting the Track penalty
(see Section 5.11 - Cutting the Track).
5.9.9 A Skater who, while stopped, helps a downed teammate to an upright position.
5.9.10 A Skater who, while stopped, assists a stopped teammate.
Page 31

5.9.11 A Skater coming to a stop as a result of giving an assist.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.9.12 Incidental contact from a Skater getting spun around as a result of another block.
5.9.13 A stopped Skater giving an assist that affects the recipient but does not improve
the recipient’s relative position.
5.9.14 A clockwise-skating or stepping Skater giving an assist that affects the recipient but
does not improve the recipient’s relative position.
5.9.15 Any block by a stopped or clockwise-moving Skater that forces the receiving
opponent off balance, forward, backward, and/or sideways, but does not cause
an opponent to lose relative position, or the initiator or a teammate to gain
relative position.
5.9.16 A Skater who, while blocking an opponent, momentarily comes to a stop, but
resumes counter-clockwise skating and/or stepping at the first legal opportunity.
5.9.16.1 If there is no legal opportunity to skate and/or step in the counterclockwise
direction, no penalty will be assessed as long as the stopped
Skater does not continue to engage.
Penalty
5.9.17 A block by a stopped Skater that includes physical contact that forces the
receiving opponent to lose relative position, or allows the initiator or a teammate to
gain relative position, or puts the opponent severely off balance.
5.9.18 A clockwise block that forces the receiving opponent to lose relative position, allows
the initiator or a teammate to gain relative position, or puts the opponent severely
off balance.
5.9.19 A clockwise skating and/or stepping Skater giving an assist to a teammate who is
neither down nor stopped that improves the recipient’s relative position. The penalty
is given to the initiator of the assist.
5.9.20 A stopped Skater giving an assist to a teammate who is neither down nor stopped
that improves the recipient’s relative position.
5.9.21 Actively maintaining a stopped position (e.g., via braking or receiving an assist), or
maintaining clockwise momentum, while impeding an opponent.
Page 32

Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued
for a conscious and forceful attempt to block an opponent in an egregious manner while
executing a clockwise or stopped block, whether or not the action was successful.
5.9.22 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent while executing a clockwise block.
5.9.23 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent while executing a stopped block.
5.10 OUT OF PLAY
Out of Play penalties are applied for actions occurring in front of and/or behind the
Engagement Zone and for actions that illegally destroy the pack (putting all previously
in-play Blockers out of play). Out of Play actions include but are not limited to blocking,
assisting, destroying the pack, failure to reform a pack, and failure to return to the
Engagement Zone. A penalty will be applied to each offending Skater for each action.
5.10.1 A Blocker who is in front of or behind the Engagement Zone may receive an Out of
Play warning from a Referee.
5.10.2 Illegally destroying the pack is the illegal creation of a No Pack situation. When two
or more groups of Blockers equal in number are on the track, are more than 10 feet
(3 meters) from one another, and no single group meets the pack definition, no
pack can be defined. If the actions of a Skater, team, or group of Skaters create
a No Pack situation, one penalty for destroying the pack will be applied to a single
Skater who is most responsible or the Pivot (see Section 6.1.5). Both teams are
responsible for maintaining a legally defined pack.
5.10.2.1 Examples of illegally destroying the pack may include but are not limited
to a Skater, Skaters, or a team running away, braking, or coasting to drop
back more than 10 feet (3 meters) behind the opposing team; taking a
knee; intentionally falling; or intentionally skating out of bounds in such a
manner that the legally defined pack is destroyed.
5.10.2.1.1 The rules do not define pack speed. Gradual deviation from
the speed of the pack as established through game play
is legal, unless said deviation is sudden, rapid, and marked,
leaving the opposing team no opportunity to adjust and
maintain a pack.
5.10.2.2 A Skater or group of Skaters is always responsible for the consequences
of their actions. If their actions create a No Pack situation (except those
covered in Sections 5.10.2.3 and 5.10.2.1.1), they must be penalized
as directed in Section 5.10.17, regardless of intent. When determining
responsibility of a No Pack situation, per Sections 3.1.2 and 5.10.2, both
teams are responsible for maintaining a legally defined pack.
Page 33

5.10.2.3 Pack destructions as a result of normal game play are not to be
considered illegal pack destructions and should not be penalized.
Skaters still must reform a pack immediately or be subject to Out of Play
penalties (see Sections 5.10.6 and 5.10.7). Examples of normal game play
that should not be considered illegal pack destructions include:
5.10.2.3.1 Forcing an opponent down or out of bounds.
5.10.2.3.2 A pack being destroyed as the result of a missed block. This is
not the same as intentionally skating out of bounds to destroy a
pack, which should be penalized according to Section 5.10.2.1.
5.10.2.4 When no Skater or team can be clearly found responsible for illegally
destroying the pack, no penalty for illegally destroying the pack may be
enforced; however, Skaters and teams are still responsible for immediately
reforming a pack (see Sections 5.10.6, 5.10.11, and 5.10.12).
5.10.3 No Skater may initiate a block while out of play, or to a Skater who is out of play. It is,
however, legal to counter-block in such a situation.
5.10.4 Blockers who are outside of the Engagement Zone will be warned to return to the
Engagement Zone, and will be penalized if they do not immediately attempt to
return to the Engagement Zone.
5.10.4.1 Blockers ahead of the Engagement Zone are compelled to skate
clockwise to return to the Engagement Zone if the pack is stopped or
moving clockwise.
5.10.5 During a No Pack situation, Skaters will be warned that there is no pack and will be
penalized if they do not immediately attempt to reform the pack. For Skaters in the
rear group, this includes stepping or skating in the counter-clockwise direction.
For Skaters in the front group, this includes coasting, braking, or coming to a
complete stop.
5.10.5.1 A Blocker who is out of bounds must attempt to return in bounds if
doing so would be legal and would reform the pack. Said Blocker is not,
however, required to skate clockwise in order to find a legal re-entry point.
5.10.5.2 If all of one team’s Blockers are out of bounds and cannot legally
re-enter in bounds, the opposing team must immediately begin moving
in a counter-clockwise direction. The out-of-bounds team will then be
responsible for returning in bounds to reform the pack as soon as it is
legal to do so (see Section 5.10.5.1).
5.10.5.3 If a Blocker is “in between” potential packs, such that skating clockwise
or counter-clockwise would potentially reform a pack, a Blocker may
skate either clockwise or counter-clockwise (per Section 5.10.5 or
Section 5.10.6).
Page 34

5.10.6 An attempt to reform is considered “immediate” if the action is taken as soon as
legally possible. If an immediate action is not sufficient to reform the pack, however,
additional effort is required. If a Blocker is in the rear group, they must accelerate
(until sprinting) toward the front group until a pack is reformed (coasting, stepping
slowly, or stepping in an only somewhat-counter-clockwise direction are insufficient).
If a Blocker is in the front group, they must actively brake until they come to a
complete stop (coasting is insufficient).
5.10.6.1 During a No Pack scenario, the front-most group is never required to skate
clockwise to reform a pack.
5.10.6.2 When pack reformation is imminent, the rear group may slow in order to
avoid unsafe contact.
5.10.7 Skaters may not assist teammates while out of play.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.10.8 No Pack situations without a measurable impact on game play.
5.10.9 Any illegal blocking while out of play that forces the receiving opponent off
balance, forward, and/or sideways, but does not cause an opponent to lose
relative position or allow the initiator or a teammate to gain relative position.
5.10.10 An Out of Play assist that affects the recipient but does not improve relative position.
Penalty
If the Out of Play action has a measurable consequence for the game, a penalty will
be assessed.
5.10.11 A Blocker who, after being warned, does not immediately attempt to return to the
Engagement Zone. A penalty must be applied to each offending Blocker who does
not attempt to return to the Engagement Zone.
5.10.12 Immediate Failure to Reform: After a warning, a failure to immediately attempt to
reform a pack (see Section 5.10.6). If a pack is not immediately reformed, a penalty
will go to one Blocker from each team, if the team has any Blockers who made no
immediate effort to reform the pack.
5.10.12.1 A Blocker who continues a block or initiates a new block after a No Pack
situation is declared will be considered to be making no effort to reform.
5.10.13 Sustained Failure to Reform: A Blocker engaging in any action (or inaction) that
inhibits or delays their attempt to reform a pack, or prolongs the No Pack scenario,
if prior attempts to reform were not sufficient (see Section 5.10.6). Only one Blocker
from each team, at a time, who is most responsible for the sustained No Pack
scenario may be penalized in this manner.
5.10.14 A Blocker returning to the Engagement Zone from behind, having lapped the pack.
A penalty must be applied to each offending Blocker (see Section 3.3.3.2).
Page 35

5.10.15 A Blocker returning to the Engagement Zone from the front, having fallen behind the
pack. A penalty must be applied to each offending Blocker (see Section 3.3.3.2).
5.10.16 Any illegal blocking while out of play that forces the receiving opponent out of their
established position. This includes forcing an opponent down, out of bounds, or out
of relative position.
5.10.17 Any illegal blocking while out of play that allows the initiator or a teammate to gain
relative position.
5.10.18 Illegally Destroying the Pack: The act of illegally destroying the pack causes all
Blockers to lose relative position. The Skater responsible for destroying the pack will
receive the penalty.
5.10.19 An Out of Play assist that improves the recipient’s relative position. The penalty is
given to the initiator of the assist.
Expulsion
The following egregious acts will be automatic game expulsions. Expulsions will be issued
for a conscious attempt to block an opponent in an egregious manner while out of play,
whether or not the action was successful.
5.10.20 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent while out of play.
5.10.21 Negligent or reckless contact with an opponent who is out of play.
5.11 CUTTING THE TRACK
When out of bounds (which includes Straddling; see Glossary), Skaters must return to an inbounds
position without improving their relative position. Violations are considered Cutting
the Track. A Skater who is in bounds need not yield the right of way to an out-of-bounds
Skater. Skaters who are out of bounds must find an entrance back in bounds that does
not require in-bounds Skaters to move. Out-of-bounds Skaters are subject to Skating Out of
Bounds penalties even if they do not cut the track (see Section 5.12 - Skating Out
of Bounds).
This section addresses penalties for Cutting the Track. Skaters must be upright and
skating or standing to receive Cutting the Track penalties (see Section 5.8 - Out of Bounds
Engagement for downed Skaters returning to the track and illegally blocking, and Section
5.3 - Low Blocking).
Downed Skaters who have returned to the track are subject to applicable Cutting the
Track penalties when they return to an in-bounds, upright, and skating or standing position.
Downed Skaters are not to be penalized with Cutting the Track penalties (until upright), but
are still subject to Low Blocking and Blocking From Out of Bounds penalties. Skaters cannot
drop back while in play in efforts to undo or avoid Cutting the Track penalties.
Page 36

5.11.1 Returning Behind the Initiator of the Block: When put into an out-of-bounds (or
straddling) position by a block, an opponent must return to the track without
improving their relative position. Returning to the track in front of the initiator of the
block is improving one’s relative position, regardless of who is in front when the
receiving Skater exits the track. An in-bounds Skater who forces an opponent out
of bounds earns and establishes superior relative position. A Skater may not return
in bounds in front of an opponent who blocked that Skater out of bounds, except
under the following circumstances where no penalty is to be issued:
5.11.1.1 When the initiating Skater is considered “in the box,” having been sent off
the track for a penalty (see Section 6.2.2.2.2).
5.11.1.2 When the initiating Skater goes out of bounds at any time after the
initiating block.
5.11.1.3 When the initiating Skater goes down or falls at any time after the
initiating block.
5.11.1.4 When an initiating Blocker exits out of the Engagement Zone at any time
after the initiating block or when, during a No Pack scenario, said Blocker
is 20 feet (6 meters) from any member of the last defined pack.
The outcome and aftermath of a block are complete when the receiving Skater has reestablished
control of their own self on the track. If the receiving Skater exits the track after
the outcome and aftermath of a block, that Skater is not required to return behind the initiator
of the previous block. The Skater is, however, still subject to Skating Out of Bounds penalties,
and Cutting the Track penalties on Skaters other than the one who initiated the block.
5.11.2 Examples of Cutting the Track:
5.11.2.1 An upright and skating Skater who returns completely in bounds (having
previously been out of bounds) in front of at least one in-play, in-bounds,
and upright Skater, which results in the offending Skater having improved
their relative position.
5.11.2.2 An upright and skating Skater who returns completely in bounds (having
previously been out of bounds) in front of at least one in-bounds and
upright Skater during a No Pack scenario, which results in the offending
Skater having improved their relative position.
Examples of Legal Play
5.11.3 A Skater straddling the track boundary line who then completely exits the track,
regardless of which, or how many, Skaters were passed while straddling. This Skater
is still subject to Skating Out of Bounds penalties (see Section 5.12 - Skating Out
of Bounds).
5.11.4 A Skater who returns in bounds in front of any Skaters who have committed
penalties prior to the Skater returning in bounds, even before said Skaters’ penalties
have been assessed.
Page 37

No Pass/No Penalty
While no penalty should be given for instances of “No Pass/No Penalty” infractions, neither
should this be considered a legal pass of the person being passed. This may result in, for
instance, a Jammer failing to earn Lead Jammer status, despite being the first Jammer to
clear the pack and having incurred no penalties.
5.11.5 Any of the scenarios in Sections 5.11.1.1-5.11.1.4.
5.11.6 A Skater cutting only one teammate.
5.11.7 A Skater returning in bounds in front of an opponent while that opponent is down
or out of bounds.
5.11.8. A Skater, having gone out of bounds or straddling, who briefly and unintentionally
completely returns to the track on one skate in their efforts to remain or return out of
bounds.
5.11.8.1 This only includes efforts to remain out of bounds. Failed attempts to reenter
the track legally, resulting in illegal game play, should be penalized
as normal.
Penalty
5.11.9 A Skater cutting any in-bounds and upright opponent, even during a No Pack situation.
5.11.10 A Skater cutting more than one in-bounds and upright teammate, even during a
No Pack situation.
Expulsion
5.11.11 Not applicable.
5.12 SKATING OUT OF BOUNDS
Skaters must remain in bounds. No part of the Skater’s skate(s) may touch the ground
outside the track boundary. Skaters may not pick up momentum for a block until in bounds
(see Section 5.8.2). Skaters may not use the out-of-bounds section of the track in order to
decrease the distance needed to travel. Skaters may also not exit the track in order to avoid
game play under their own power, even if due to poor judgment of speed.
Examples of Legal Play
5.12.1 Maintaining or increasing speed while out of bounds in the outfield to travel to or
from the Penalty Box.
5.12.2 Exiting the track of one’s own accord in order to avoid an obstacle (e.g., spills,
debris, or downed Skaters).
Page 38

5.12.3 Exiting the track as a result of receiving a block.
5.12.4 Exiting the track as a result of executing a block, or missing a block.
5.12.5 Exiting the track of one’s own accord as a result of injury.
5.12.6 Exiting the track of one’s own accord to address an equipment malfunction.
5.12.7 Exiting the track of one’s own accord to retrieve a helmet cover that is out of
bounds (if allowed to do so; see Section 2.6 - Helmet Covers).
5.12.8 Cutting across the infield in order to legally re-enter the track behind an opponent
(for example, one Jammer attempting to return to the track after the other Jammer
has skated clockwise).
No Impact / No Penalty
5.12.9 Intentionally adopting a straddling state, for any reason, so long as the Skater does
not fully exit the track.
5.12.10 Exiting the track due to the belief that one had reason to be out of bounds legally.
5.12.10.1 Mistakenly exiting the track due to mishearing an Official’s instruction
(e.g., a Skater thinking that they have been called on a penalty when in
fact they were not).
5.12.10.2 Exiting the track after a maneuver that the Skater believes brought them
out of bounds (e.g., an apex jump).
5.12.11 After a warning (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play), exiting the track whilst out of play
as a result of an immediate attempt to return to the Engagement Zone, so long as
this does not substantially cut the lap distance short.
5.12.12 Exiting the track at any point during the four jam-ending whistles.
5.12.13 Exiting the track due to a loss of balance (even if the Skater remains upright). This
Skater is still potentially subject to penalties under Section 5.11 - Cutting the Track.
5.12.14 Exiting the track due to a failed apex jump. This Skater is still potentially subject to
penalties under Section 5.11 - Cutting the Track.
5.12.15 Being propelled fully out of bounds by a teammate. The out-of-bounds Skater is still
potentially subject to pack destruction penalties (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play).
Penalty
5.12.16 Skating while out of bounds in a manner that significantly cuts the lap distance
short. For example:
5.12.16.1 Cutting across the infield on the way to the Penalty Box.
Page 39

5.12.16.2 Repeatedly cutting small amounts of the lap distance short, which
together add up to a significant portion of lap distance having been cut
short over the course of the game.
5.12.17 Crossing the track while down, from the outfield to the infield.
5.12.18 Skating while out of bounds to maintain or increase speed. For example, performing
a crossover while touching out of bounds.
5.12.19 A Skater fully exiting the track, perhaps straddling along the way, entirely under
their own power (except where defined as legal or no-impact above), including
while down.
5.12.19.1 A Skater who returns from the outfield to the track and misjudges their
speed, causing them to exit the track on the infield, has left the track
entirely under their own power.
5.12.19.2 A Skater who fully exits the track in order to avoid receiving a block is
considered to be exiting the track entirely under their own power.
Expulsion
5.12.20 Not applicable.
5.13 ILLEGAL PROCEDURES
Technical infractions that give the offending team an advantage but do not necessarily
impact a specific opponent.
Examples of Legal Play
5.13.1 A Skater who establishes legal starting position on the track before the jam-starting
whistle, but is blocked out of bounds or out of legal starting position prior to or as
the jam-starting whistle blows. This Skater will be allowed to remain in the jam, and is
not considered to have committed a False Start.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.13.2 A Skater completely exiting the Penalty Box before their penalty time finishes after
being incorrectly instructed to do so by the Penalty Box Official. The Skater must
return to the box and finish the penalty.
5.13.3 Too many Skaters on the track. The extra Skater is instructed to return to the bench
without stopping the jam. 
Page 40

5.13.4 More than one designated Pivot for a team on the track after the jam-starting
whistle. The Skater at fault is the Pivot who was the last Pivot to enter the track in
that jam. If the Referee is unable to determine the last Pivot to enter the track, the
Referee handling the Illegal Procedure must single out the closest Pivot on the track.
After the whistle, the Referee must instruct that Skater to return to the bench if that
Skater is an extra Skater on the track (see Section 5.13.3) or remove the helmet
cover if that Skater is an extra Pivot, but the team otherwise has the correct number
of Blockers. Any Pivot starting in the Penalty Box is the designated Pivot for that jam.
5.13.5 A Jammer without established Lead Jammer status attempting to call off a jam, if
the jam is not called off.
5.13.6 A Blocker starting the jam with more than one knee down.
Penalty
5.13.7 Failure to Yield: A Skater who commits a False Start (see Section 3.2.8) by touching
partially outside of their legal starting area at the jam-starting whistle, and then fails
to yield advantage gained thereby.
5.13.8 Illegal Positioning: A Skater who commits a False Start (see Section 3.2.7) by
touching completely outside of their legal starting area (but fully inside the track
boundary) at the jam-starting whistle. Each Skater who violates this rule shall
receive a penalty, even if this includes more than one Skater from the same team.
5.13.8.1 If all of a team’s Blockers are illegally positioned by touching completely
outside of their legal starting area, the jam should not be started.
5.13.8.2 If, at the jam-starting whistle, a pack cannot be defined because one or
more Skaters is touching partially outside of their legal starting area (see
Section 3.2.8), one Skater who is touching partially outside their legal
starting area will be immediately penalized (i.e., not given a chance to
yield). If more than one Skater could be assessed this penalty, it should
go to the Pivot (if the Pivot is illegally positioned as described), or to the
Skater closest to the Referee.
5.13.9 A penalized Skater who leaves the Penalty Box during either a team or
Official Timeout.
5.13.10 Entering the Penalty Box to communicate with a penalized Skater (see Section
6.2.4.1).
5.13.10.1 All medical support staff will be allowed into the box as necessary,
but may only communicate with penalized Skaters regarding
medical matters.
5.13.10.2 If a team’s non-skating bench staff enters the Penalty Box to
communicate with a penalized Skater, this penalty will be issued to their
team’s Captain.
Page 41

5.13.11 A penalized Skater who removes safety equipment while in the Penalty Box. A
penalized Skater may remove their mouth guard only after being seated in the
Penalty Box. Merely adjusting safety equipment while in the Penalty Box is not to
be penalized.
5.13.12 Forcing a jam to be called off due to too many Skaters on the track. Per Section
8.2.1.1.1, if too many Skaters are on the track, the Referees will direct a Skater off the
track. If a Skater does not leave the track and the jam is called off due to too many
Skaters being on the track, that Skater will receive the penalty.
5.13.13 Improper uniform, jewelry, or skates.
5.13.14 A Jammer without Lead Jammer status successfully calling off a jam.
5.13.15 Violations of rules regarding possessing or wearing helmet covers (see Section 2 -
Skater Positions and Identification), including violations of the procedures outlined
in Section 2.5 - Passing the Star. The initiator of the illegal action receives the penalty.
5.13.16 Preventing a Star Pass via any means other than legal blocking.
5.13.17 A Skater exiting the Penalty Box who re-enters the track in a manner that would
constitute a penalty for cutting (see Section 5.11 - Cutting the Track), given that all
in-bounds and upright Blockers are assumed to have superior position to a Skater
returning from the box.
5.13.18 A Skater, after being waved off of a full Penalty Box, who re-enters the track in a
manner that would constitute a penalty for cutting (see Section 5.11 - Cutting the
Track), given that all in-bounds and upright Blockers are assumed to have superior
position to a Skater returning from the box.
5.13.19 A Skater, after addressing mid-jam equipment malfunction, who re-enters the
track in a manner that would constitute a penalty for cutting (see Section 5.11 -
Cutting the Track), given that all in-bounds and upright Blockers are assumed to
have superior position to a Skater returning after addressing mid-jam equipment
malfunctions.
5.13.20 A Skater completely exiting the Penalty Box before they are released by an Official.
(Note: If the Penalty Box Official instructs the Skater to leave early, this penalty does
not apply; see Section 5.13.2.)
5.13.21 Too many Skaters and/or team support staff in the designated team area. The
penalty is issued to the Pivot at the time the penalty is determined. If there is no
Pivot in that jam, the penalty is issued to the Captain in all circumstances.
5.13.22 Removing required safety equipment (see Sections 6.2.6 and 9.1.1).
5.13.23 A Skater who has fouled out of a game interfering with play of the game beyond
behavior expected from an audience member. This includes returning to the
designated team area during the remainder of the game. This penalty is to be
assessed to that Skater’s team’s Captain.
Page 42

5.13.24 An expelled Skater failing to leave the track or staging area, or returning to the
track area after they have been expelled. This includes returning to the designated
team area during the remainder of the game. This penalty is to be assessed to that
Skater’s team’s Captain.
5.13.25 Skaters who intentionally begin in a starting position that purposefully prolongs their
ability to return to an in-play position or their team’s ability to form or reform a pack
at the jam-starting whistle (e.g., intentionally starting on one’s back, intentionally
starting in a dog pile). One penalty will be applied, per team, to the single Skater
who seems most responsible, or the Pivot, for beginning the jam in this manner.
Other Skaters may receive subsequent penalties for failure to reform the pack, per
Sections 5.10.6 and 5.10.13.
Expulsion
5.13.26 Not applicable.
5.14 INSUBORDINATION
Insubordination penalties will be given for actions that demonstrate a disregard for the
authority of the Officials, whether intentional or not. Examples of Insubordination include,
but are not limited to, failure to leave the track for a penalty, failure to leave the track after
fouling out, and the use of contemptuous speech directed at an Official.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.14.1 Intentionally committing an Illegal Procedure is not Insubordination and must not
be penalized as such.
Penalty
5.14.2 Willfully failing to leave the track for a penalty.
5.14.3 A Skater who, after having been clearly and appropriately called on a penalty
(per Section 8.2.5.2), fails to leave the track. This penalty will be assessed even if the
Skater is not aware that they have been called, so long as:
5.14.3.1 The penalty was called using the correct hand signal and verbal cue.
5.14.3.2 The Referee calling the penalty was correctly positioned for the Skater to
potentially see the call.
5.14.3.3 The Referee calling the penalty did so loudly enough to be heard, given
the Referee’s position, and the constraints and volume of the venue.
5.14.4 The use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures directed at an
Official. If no one can be singled out as the offending party, but it is clearly coming
from a Skater, this penalty will be issued to the corresponding Captain.
Page 43

Expulsion
5.14.5 Willfully failing to leave the floor after fouling out.
5.14.6 The repeated use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures directed at
an Official.
5.14.7 Deliberate and excessive insubordination to a Referee.
5.15 DELAY OF GAME
Delay of Game penalties will be given for actions that interfere with the standard
progression of the game. If a Delay of Game penalty is warranted, the Officials should take a
timeout at the end of the 30-second line-up time instead of starting a new jam. The penalty
should be enforced, and a new line-up period begun as soon as possible.
Examples of Legal Action
5.15.1 A Captain or Designated Alternate calling a timeout or Official Review when they
are allowed to.
5.15.2 A Captain or Designated Alternate talking to the Head Referee, who then
independently decides to call an Official Timeout.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.15.3 Not applicable.
Penalty
5.15.4 Failure to be on the track for the next jam at jam start, in the appropriate position
(Pivot or Blocker), when currently in the Penalty Box queue. One penalty will be
assessed to each offending Skater.
5.15.5 Failure to field any Blockers for a jam, preventing a jam from beginning. Penalty will
be assessed to the Captain (see Section 8.2.7.1.2 for refusal to field Skaters).
5.15.6 Failure to field any Blockers between the Pivot and Jammer Lines, preventing a pack
from forming between the Pivot and Jammer Lines at the first legal opportunity.
Penalty will be assessed to the Captain. If both teams fail to field any Blockers in this
way, one penalty will be issued to each Captain.
5.15.7 With one Jammer serving a penalty in the Penalty Box, a failure to field a Jammer
for the next jam by the opposing team, preventing a jam from beginning. Penalty
will be assessed to the Captain.
5.15.8 Both teams failing to field a Jammer, preventing a jam from beginning. One penalty
will be issued to each Captain.
Page 44

5.15.9 A team successfully requesting a team timeout when they have none remaining.
Penalty will be assessed to the Captain.
5.15.10 A Skater, having previously had the jam called off for injury, being on the track at
the jam start before the allotted three jams required for the Skater to sit out have
elapsed (see Section 9.3.1). The penalty should be issued to the Captain. If the
Referee believes the injury presents a serious and immediate threat to the Skater or
others, the Referee should immediately send the Skater back to their bench rather
than wait until the end of the line-up time.
Expulsion
5.15.11 Not applicable.
5.16 MISCONDUCT/GROSS MISCONDUCT
When a Skater engages in unsporting conduct, that Skater may receive a penalty or
expulsion based on the degree to which the action is deemed inappropriate. This may
include being rude to opponents, support staff, or audience members; physical contact
outside the range of appropriate contact for the sport; or any act that undermines the
dignity of the sport.
Examples of Legal Play
5.16.1 Initiating contact with both skates off of the ground to a teammate is legal,
regardless of the impact on that teammate. The impacted teammate is, however,
responsible for the legality of their own actions.
5.16.2 Entry to the Penalty Box that causes a teammate to either move or be forcibly contacted.
No Impact/No Penalty
5.16.3 Entry to the Penalty Box that causes contact only to persons intruding on either the
safety lane and/or the Penalty Box.
5.16.4 Contact, either actual or potential, by the Skater’s penalty seat to another person
that is caused by a structural failure of the seat, not by the entry of the Skater to the
Penalty Box.
5.16.5 Initiating contact with both skates off of the ground that forces the receiving
opponent off balance, forward, and/or sideways, but does not cause the opponent
to lose their relative position.
5.16.6 A Skater initiating contact or engaging an opponent before the jam-starting whistle
that forces the receiving opponent off balance, forward, or sideways, but does not
cause the opponent to lose their established starting position.
5.16.7 A Skater initiating contact or engaging an opponent after the fourth jam-ending
whistle that forces the opponent slightly off balance, forward, or sideways but does
not cause the opponent to fall.
Page 45

Penalty (Misconduct)
5.16.8 Initiating contact with both skates off of the ground that forces the receiving
opponent out of established position. This includes forcing an opponent down, out
of bounds, or out of relative position.
5.16.9 Executing a block on an opponent who is down.
5.16.10 The use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures directed at a
mascot, announcer, audience member, or other event production individuals. If no
one can be singled out as the offending party but it is clearly coming from a Skater,
this penalty will be issued to the corresponding Captain.
5.16.11 The excessive use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures directed
at an opponent, teammate, manager, coach, or other team support staff. If no
one can be singled out as the offending party but it is clearly coming from a
Skater, or if a team as a whole is being offensive (though no individual Skater’s
offensive speech is considered “excessive”), this penalty will be assessed to the
corresponding Captain.
5.16.12 A Skater who, on their way to the Penalty Box during a jam, causes another
person (including Officials, opponents, and audience members, but not including
teammates) to vacate their position to reasonably avoid being forcibly contacted.
This includes people correctly positioned in their team area and is not limited to
people in the Penalty Box.
5.16.13 Habitual entry to the Penalty Box during a jam in which contact, either actual or
potential, by the Skater’s seat to another person (including Officials, opponents,
and audience members, but not including teammates) is caused by a structural
failure of the seat and not the entry of the Skater. Penalty is to be issued where
proper precaution is not being shown by the offending Skater, causing the habitual
failure of a seat or seats.
5.16.14 Intentionally adopting a downed position so as to deceive a Referee into
incorrectly calling a penalty on an opponent.
5.16.15 Intentionally adopting a downed position in an attempt to avoid a block.
5.16.16 Any contact initiated by a downed Skater that causes an opponent to fall or lose
relative position, or allows a teammate to gain relative position.
5.16.17 A Skater initiating contact or engaging an opponent before the jam-starting whistle
that forces the receiving opponent out of their established starting position. This
includes forcing an opponent down, out of bounds, severely off balance, or into an
illegal starting position.
5.16.18 A Skater initiating contact or engaging an opponent before the jam-starting whistle
that allows the initiator to gain a superior starting position. This includes gaining
a legal starting position (gaining an in-bounds or legal starting position via the
contact), or breaking a wall of opponents. 
Page 46

5.16.19 A Skater initiating contact or engaging an opponent after the fourth jam-ending
whistle that forces the receiving opponent down or severely off balance, forward, or
sideways.
Expulsion (Gross Misconduct)
Gross Misconduct is defined as an indiscretion so serious that it justifies the instant expulsion
of a Skater, even on the first occurrence. The following egregious acts will be an automatic
game expulsion, even if not during a fight.
5.16.20 Illegal interference in game play by Skaters or support staff not involved in the jam.
5.16.21 The repeated use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures directed at
a mascot, announcer, audience member, or other event production individuals.
5.16.22 The repetitive and excessive use of obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures
directed at an opponent, teammate, manager, coach, or other support staff.
5.16.23 Fighting, defined as a physical struggle that is not part of regular game play.
A Skater who only defends blows and does not engage in the fight will not be
penalized (see Section 6.4.2).
5.16.24 Biting.
5.16.25 Jumping onto or into a pile of fighting Skaters (i.e., “dog pile”).
5.16.26 Serious physical violence or any action deemed by the Officials to cause an
extraordinary physical threat.
5.16.27 A Skater who, on their way to the Penalty Box during a jam, makes forcible contact
with another person (other than a teammate), or who causes a Penalty Box seat to
do so. This includes contact made to people correctly positioned in their team area
and is not limited to people in the Penalty Box.
5.16.28 Forcible contact to an Official that is either reasonably avoidable or intentional.
6 PENALTY ENFORCEMENT
6.1 PENALTIES
6.1.1 When a Skater has earned a penalty, that Skater will be sent to the Penalty Box. The
Skater will retain the position they were playing when the penalty was assessed
(Jammer, Pivot Blocker, or Non-Pivot Blocker) until the penalty has expired (see
Section 6.2.2).
6.1.1.1 A penalty is considered to be assessed, and a Skater is considered to
have been sent to the Penalty Box, once the action that warrants a
penalty has been committed.
Page 47

6.1.1.2 No Skater, including the Skater who has earned the penalty, can be held
responsible for behaving as if a penalty has been assessed until the
Official has completed the appropriate hand signals and verbal cues.
6.1.1.3 When a jam is not in progress, Skaters who commit illegal actions that
warrant penalties will serve in the position indicated by the helmet cover
worn at the time the illegal act was committed.
6.1.1.3.1 A Captain who is assessed a penalty due to their role as
Captain (for example, due to an illegal action committed by
a bench manager) will serve the penalty as a Blocker as soon
as they are able to serve a penalty in that position.
6.1.1.3.2 If a Pivot or Blocker commits a penalty in between jams while
the Penalty Box is full, they must report to the Penalty Box and
will be placed in the Penalty Box queue. All Penalty Box rules
and procedures apply (see Section 6.2.2.3).
6.1.1.3.3 If a Skater who has lined up as a Jammer or Pivot commits a
penalty between jams while there is already a Jammer or Pivot
from their team in the Penalty Box, that Skater will serve as a
Blocker.
6.1.2 Penalties expire after 30 seconds served in the Penalty Box. Each penalty is timed
separately and individually.
6.1.3 If an Illegal Procedure gives an unfair advantage, the Referee will assess a penalty
and may stop the jam if the offending team fails to yield the advantage
immediately.
6.1.4 If a penalty is committed by a non-Skater (e.g., by a team’s bench staff), the
penalty will be assessed to the Captain unless otherwise specified. If such an
action is committed during a jam in which the Captain is not skating, the Captain
will serve the penalty beginning in the following jam.
6.1.5 If a single penalty is committed by a group of teammates, or if no single Skater can
be identified as most responsible (including penalties committed during a jam),
the penalty will be assessed to the team’s Pivot unless otherwise specified. If there is
not a Pivot, it will go to the Captain.
6.2 PENALTY ENFORCEMENT
6.2.1 Substitutions: No substitutions are allowed if a penalty carries over to the next jam.
The offending Skater must continue to serve their penalty time. The penalized
team skates short until the penalty time expires and the penalized Skater returns
to the track.
6.2.1.1 Penalized Skaters must be substituted in the case of a Skater who has
been injured, fouled out, or expelled (see Sections 9.3, 6.4.1, and 6.4.2, 
Page 48

respectively). These substitutions may only take place between jams. A
Skater who has fouled out or has been expelled is not permitted to return
to play and that Skater’s team must skate a Skater short for the remainder
of the jam.
6.2.2 Penalty Box Procedures, Rights, and Restrictions: When a Skater is sent to the Penalty
Box, the Skater must immediately exit the track to the appropriate direction (outfield
or infield, corresponding to the location of the Penalty Box; see Section 5.14.2). The
Skater must then skate to the Penalty Box in the counter-clockwise direction without
returning to the track. The Penalty Box boundary is considered to be part of the
Penalty Box (see also Section 1.2.7).
6.2.2.1 Penalty timing will not begin until the penalized Skater legally enters the
Penalty Box from the appropriate counter-clockwise direction and is seated.
6.2.2.1.1 If, after being sent to the Penalty Box, all parts of a penalized
Skater have passed beyond Point of No Return (see Glossary),
the Skater must skate all the way around the track in order to
enter the box from the appropriate counter-clockwise direction.
6.2.2.2 No team may have more than two Blockers and one Jammer seated in
the Penalty Box at a time. If a team has more than two penalized Blockers,
the penalties will be served consecutively (i.e., the third Blocker will sit
out once the first Blocker has served their penalty). This may require the
third Blocker to serve their penalty in the next jam, in which case the third
penalized Blocker will be asked to return to the track (see Section 6.2.2.3).
6.2.2.2.1 If the Skater fails to remain on the track in the next jam
while in the Penalty Box queue, the Skater will be penalized
according to Section 5.15.4.
6.2.2.2.2 The moment the penalized Skater is directed off the track, the
Skater is considered “in the box” for scoring, Lead Jammer,
Passing the Star, and Cutting the Track rule purposes, and is
no longer considered part of the pack for purposes of pack
definition. However, penalty time will not start until the Skater is
seated in the box.
6.2.2.2.3 In order to form a pack, a team must have at least one
Blocker on the track at all times. If there is only one Blocker
from a given team, that Skater will not be sent to the Penalty
Box, even if the Penalty Box cap has not been reached, until
another Blocker returns to the track and has joined the pack.
6.2.2.2.3.1 The penalized Skater will be sent to the Penalty
Box as soon as there is room in the box, provided
another Blocker from the Skater’s team is on the
track and has joined the pack.
6.2.2.3 If there are already two Blockers seated in the box from the penalized
Blocker’s team, the third Blocker will be waved off by the Penalty Timer. If
there is an empty seat (e.g., because there are fewer than 10 seconds 
Page 49

left on penalties currently being served, resulting in a Blocker vacating a
seat), the third Blocker may be seated as normal. If a Blocker is waved off,
they must return to the track as described in Section 6.2.7. A Jammer can
never be waved off from the Penalty Box.
6.2.2.3.1 Once a Blocker has been waved off in this manner, they no
longer count as “penalized,” and may play as normal once
they have returned to the track (except where otherwise
noted; for example, Section 2.5.1.5) until a Referee has
directed them back to the box to serve their penalty (per
Section 6.2.2.2.3.1).
6.2.3 The penalty clock starts when the Skater is seated in the Penalty Box (with
exceptions noted in Section 6.2.2.3). The penalty clock only runs when the jam
clock is running. If a penalty spans multiple jams, the penalty clock will stop
between jams. If a Skater is seated between jams, the penalty clock starts when the
next jam begins.
6.2.3.1 When there are 10 seconds remaining on the penalty clock of a
penalized Skater, that Skater will be instructed by the Penalty Timer to
stand. The Skater must stand upright.
6.2.3.1.1 If a Skater has 10 or fewer seconds remaining on their penalty
when they are seated (for example, per Section 6.3 - Both
Jammers Penalized/Both Jammers Off the Track, or because
they were incorrectly instructed to leave the box early by an
Official per Section 5.13.2), they will be immediately instructed
to stand.
6.2.3.1.2 If a Skater does not stand when instructed, the Penalty Timer
will stop the penalty clock until the Skater stands.
6.2.3.2 If a Skater stands before there are 10 seconds remaining on the
penalty clock, the Penalty Timer will stop the penalty clock until the
Skater is seated.
6.2.4 Penalized Skaters may not leave the designated Penalty Box Area during either a
team or Official Timeout (see Section 5.13.9).
6.2.4.1 A penalized Skater’s teammates, managers, and coaches may not
physically enter the designated Penalty Box Area to communicate with
the penalized Skater at any time (see Section 5.13.10).
6.2.5 Penalized Captains and penalized Designated Alternates may not call a timeout
from the Penalty Box. A request for a timeout or Official Review signaled to the
Referees from a penalized Captain or a penalized Designated Alternate will not
be granted.
6.2.6 Penalized Skaters may remove only their mouth guard once they are seated in
the Penalty Box. No other equipment may be removed while a Skater is in the
designated Penalty Box Area (see Section 5.13.11).
Page 50

6.2.7 After being released from the Penalty Box, a penalized Skater may return to the
track. A Skater may skate clockwise in the clearance around the outside of the
track when exiting the Penalty Box (see Section 5.13.17).
6.2.7.1 A Jammer returning to play from the Penalty Box during the same jam
may score immediately upon returning if the Jammer was pulled from
the jam after having completed their first pass through the pack.
6.2.7.2 If a Jammer is partially through a scoring pass when sent to the
Penalty Box, the Jammer retains all of the points scored in the partial
pass. Upon returning to the track, the Jammer has the opportunity to
complete the pass, only earning points for opponents that the Jammer
had not yet passed.
6.2.7.3 A Skater may return to the track in front of opponents who are out of
play. If a Jammer is eligible to score (having completed their initial pass
prior to being sent to the Penalty Box), the Jammer will immediately earn
points for passing Blockers who are outside of the Engagement Zone,
behind the Jammer, upon re-entry (see Section 7.2.7.2).
6.3 BOTH JAMMERS PENALIZED/BOTH JAMMERS OFF THE TRAC K
Concurrent Jammer penalties shorten the penalty time of both Jammers. Both Jammers
will serve the same exact amount of time before they are each allowed back into play.
When the second Jammer is seated in the Penalty Box, the first Jammer, who has already
been serving time, is released back into play by the Penalty Box Official. The exact amount
of time the first Jammer served before release will be the exact amount of time the second
Jammer will serve before the second Jammer is released back into play (Section 6.3.4 is
still applicable).
Example: Jammer A has served 17 seconds when Jammer B is seated in the Penalty Box.
Jammer A is released from the Penalty Box and Jammer B begins to serve 17 seconds. The
actual time both Jammers serve will always be equal with the only exception being the end
of the game as the final jam is whistled dead.
6.3.1 If the first penalized Jammer is sent back to the box after being released from the
Penalty Box while the second penalized Jammer is still serving their required time,
the game will continue without a Jammer on the track for the duration of any
penalty time that is required to be served.
6.3.1.1 If the jam clock expires with both Jammers in the box serving their required
time, a new jam will begin without Jammers on the Jammer Line. Both
Jammers will return to play following completion of any required penalty time.
6.3.2 If both Jammers are seated in the box at the same exact moment, both Jammers
will serve 10 seconds before they are simultaneously released back into play by the
Penalty Box Official. In all other cases, no minimum time to serve will be required.
Page 51

6.3.3 If any jam ends with one Jammer in the box and the second Jammer skating
toward the box after being sent off the track, the penalty time for the Jammer who
is already in the box will end with the fourth jam-ending whistle. That Jammer will
start the new jam from the Penalty Box as their team’s Jammer, and will be allowed
to return to play after the jam-starting whistle in the new jam. The second Jammer
will begin the new jam in the box to serve their required time.
6.3.3.1 A team may not make a substitution for either Jammer.
6.3.4 If a penalized Jammer exits the Penalty Box before being officially dismissed by an
Official, that Jammer will be required to return to the box and serve any unserved time,
no matter how small. Per Section 5.13.20, that Jammer will also be assessed a penalty.
6.3.4.1 If the other Jammer is seated in the box before the first Jammer has
returned to the box to serve their time, the second Jammer will remain
in the box until their penalty is complete, or until the first Jammer is
once again seated, whichever comes first. When the original Jammer
is once again seated, they will serve the remainder of their first penalty,
plus the amount of time served by the second Jammer. This combined
penalty time will be served by the original Jammer regardless of the other
Jammer’s actions from this point forward.
6.3.5 If a penalized Jammer is incorrectly dismissed early from the Penalty Box by an
Official, that Jammer will be required to return to the box and serve any unserved
time, no matter how small. This Jammer will not be assessed a penalty.
6.3.5.1 If the other Jammer is seated in the box before the first Jammer has
returned to the box, they will serve as many seconds as the original
Jammer had served. The original Jammer is thereby excused from their
unserved time, and is no longer required to return to the box. If they report
to the box anyway, they will be instructed to return to the track.
6.3.6 If one team’s Jammer does not make it onto the track in time to participate in the
jam and during the course of that jam the opposing team’s Jammer is sent off for a
penalty, the jam will be whistled dead when the penalized Jammer is seated in the
Penalty Box. The Jammer will begin the new jam in the box and the team that did not
field a Jammer in the previous jam will be allowed to field a Jammer in the new jam.
6.3.6.1 In the new jam, Skater substitutions from the bench are allowed, with the
exception of the penalized Jammer.
6.3.7 With one Jammer already in the box or if a team fails to field a Jammer, if the
opposing team’s Jammer leaves the jam due to equipment failure or malfunction,
the jam will not be called off. The jam will continue without a Jammer on the track
until the Jammer who left returns to play after the equipment issue has been
addressed, or until the penalized Jammer’s penalty time has expired, whichever
comes first.
6.3.8 With one Jammer already in the box or if a team fails to field a Jammer, if the
opposing team’s Jammer leaves the jam due to an injury, the jam will be whistled
dead after it has been determined by the Referee that the Jammer will not be 
Page 52

returning to play. A new jam will be started with the penalized Jammer still in the
box serving the remainder of the required penalty time and the opposing team
fielding a new Jammer.
6.3.8.1 In the new jam, Skater substitutions from the bench are allowed with the
exception of an injured Jammer, who must now sit for either three jams
(per Section 9.3.1) or the remainder of the period (per Section 9.3.1.1).
6.3.9 With one Jammer already in the box, if the opposing team’s Jammer leaves the
jam because of a decision to quit playing (e.g., sits on their team’s bench midjam,
leaves the track area mid-jam), the jam will be whistled dead after it has been
determined by the Referee that the Jammer will not be returning to play (Sections
6.3.7 and 6.3.8 do not apply). A new jam will be started with the penalized Jammer
still in the box serving the remainder of the required penalty time, and the opposing
team fielding a new Jammer. The Jammer who ends a jam by quitting is to be
considered as having quit the game. That Jammer is not permitted to return to play
for the remainder of the game.
6.3.10 If the first penalized Jammer has fouled out of or has been expelled from the game,
when the second penalized Jammer is seated in the box the jam will be whistled
dead. The first penalized Jammer’s team will field a new Jammer in the new jam.
The substitute Jammer will start the new jam in the Penalty Box, and will be released
upon the jam-starting whistle. The second Jammer will remain in the box at the start
of the new jam and will serve an amount of time equal to the first Jammer (see
Section 6.4.5).
6.3.10.1 Teammates may be substituted in the new jam, with the exception of any
Skaters who still owe penalty time.
6.3.11 When a penalized Jammer is serving more than one consecutive penalty in the
Penalty Box and the opposing Jammer arrives in the Penalty Box when the first
penalized Jammer has more than 30 seconds of penalty time remaining to serve,
the arriving Jammer will be released back into play by the Penalty Box Official
immediately after taking their seat in the Penalty Box. The remaining penalty time of
the first Jammer is reduced by 30 seconds.
6.3.11.1 If the opposing Jammer arrives during the timing of the first penalized
Jammer’s final penalty, normal rules apply to the second penalized
Jammer (see Section 6.3 - Both Jammers Penalized/Both Jammers Off the
Track).
6.4 EXPULSION AND FOULING OUT
6.4.1 Fouling Out: A Skater fouls out from the game when seven penalties have been
assessed to that Skater.
6.4.1.1. This includes penalties assessed to the Pivot or Captain for actions that
other people committed (see Sections 6.1.4–6.1.5)
Page 53

6.4.1.1.1 This does not include time served without a penalty being
recorded (see Section 6.4.2.3.1).
6.4.1.2 When a Skater fouls out of a game, that Skater must immediately leave
the track and may not remain on the team’s bench. The fouled-out Skater
may join the audience for the game, but is not allowed to participate
beyond the manner in which an audience member would be expected.
Another Skater from that Skater’s team must serve any applicable penalty
time; this substitute must serve in the same position (Pivot, Blocker, or
Jammer) as the Skater who has fouled out. Substitutions for Skaters who
have fouled out cannot happen during an in-progress jam. The fouledout
Skater is not permitted to return to play and their team must skate a
Skater short for the remainder of the jam (see Section 6.2.1.1).
6.4.1.2.1 If a Skater who has fouled out interferes with game play,
their team will be penalized according to Section 5.13.23.
Additionally, that Skater may no longer remain on the floor
and must return to the locker room or staging area. The Skater
may not remain on the floor with their team or in an area
where the fouled-out Skater can interfere with Skaters on the
track.
6.4.2 Expulsion
6.4.2.1 A Skater may be expelled from the game at the Head Referee’s discretion
for serious physical violence or any action deemed by the Officials to cause
an extraordinary physical threat to others (see Section 5.16.26), or for
extremely unsporting conduct. Only the Head Referee may expel a Skater,
coach, or manager. The Head Referee’s decision is binding.
6.4.2.2 Referees may not downgrade an expulsion. Any behavior that does not
clearly warrant an expulsion should use the examples in Section 5 –
Penalties as guidelines to determine whether a penalty or expulsion is
warranted.
6.4.2.3 Expulsions are a special class of penalty; as such, the team an expelled
Skater was on must play down one Skater for at least 30 seconds (except
where shortened per Section 6.3), as if a penalty had been issued.
6.4.2.3.1 Coaches and managers are held to the same standard
of sporting behavior as Skaters. If a coach or manager is
expelled (see Section 6.4.2.1), that team’s Captain will serve
this time, but no penalty will be recorded for the Captain.
6.4.3 The Head Referee does not need to meet with either Captain prior to expelling a
Skater from the game.
6.4.4 An expelled Skater must immediately leave the track and return to the locker room or
staging area. The expelled Skater may not remain on the floor with their team or in an
area (such as the stands) where the expelled Skater can interfere with Skaters on the
track. The expelled Skater is not allowed to participate in the remainder of the game
in any way.
Page 54

6.4.5 Timing a Fouled Out/Expelled Skater’s Penalty
The team of a Skater who is ejected from a game, either due to an expulsion or
fouling out, must play down a Skater in the ejected Skater’s position, as if a penalty
had been assessed. If the jam ends before the penalty time is complete, the
remainder of the penalty time will be served by a substitute in the following jam.
6.4.5.1 Timing of the penalty for an ejected Skater begins as soon as they are
seated, per Section 6.2.3.1. If they are not seated, their timing begins after
a Referee:
6.4.5.1.1 Has made sure the ejected Skater has immediately left the
track (ejected Skaters must also return to the locker room or
staging area per Sections 6.4.1.2 and 6.4.4), and
6.4.5.1.2 Has instructed the Penalty Box Official to begin timing the
penalty for the ejected Skater, or
6.4.5.1.3 Has provided that the substitute is seated at the beginning of
the next jam.
7 SCORING
Only Skaters wearing the designated Jammer helmet cover with visible stars are eligible to score points.
7.1 PASSES
(See Glossary for Pass (noun) and Pass (verb) for definitions of when passes begin and end.)
7.1.1 A Jammer does not score points on opposing Blockers on their first pass through
the pack. This “initial pass” is to determine Lead Jammer status (see Section 2.4 -
Lead Jammer).
7.1.1.1 During an overtime jam, an exception is made: The initial pass is
considered to be a scoring pass, and there is no Lead Jammer (see
Section 1.6 - Overtime).
7.1.2 A Jammer may score a Jammer Lap Point on their initial pass.
7.1.3 After completing their initial pass, a Jammer scores points by passing opponents
on their second and subsequent passes. These are considered “scoring passes.”
A Jammer can score a maximum of one point per opposing Blocker per scoring
pass. Jammer Lap Points are independent of scoring passes. In order to receive a
point for passing an opponent, the Jammer must:
7.1.3.1 Pass the opponents’ hips while in bounds and upright, legally, while
wearing the Jammer helmet cover with the stars visible, without
committing penalties. 
Page 55

7.1.3.2 Any legal pass counts. If a Jammer becomes ineligible for a point by
committing an illegal action or passing while out of bounds, the Jammer
is allowed an opportunity to re-pass and score the point.
7.1.3.3 Passes while airborne will result in points only if:
7.1.3.3.1 The Jammer was in bounds when they left the track,
7.1.3.3.2 The Jammer lands in bounds,
7.1.3.3.3 The Jammer’s skate is the first part of the Jammer to make
contact with the track, and
7.1.3.3.4 The Jammer’s skate re-connects with the track prior to the
end of the jam.
7.1.3.4 A Jammer who is in bounds but down may earn points for opposing
Blockers who were ahead of the Jammer but skate clockwise behind the
downed Jammer. This is considered to be a pass.
7.1.3.5 The Jammer’s scoring pass is complete (and their next scoring pass
begins) once the Jammer has exited the Engagement Zone. If there
is no pack, the scoring pass ends when the Jammer passes the
foremost Blocker. If the Jammer is ahead of all Blockers, their pass ends
immediately if a No Pack situation is declared (see Section 2.4 - Lead
Jammer and Section 3.1 - Pack Definition).
7.1.4 A Jammer’s initial pass through the pack begins as soon as the Jammer is behind
the pack after the jam-starting whistle. If no pack is defined, the initial pass begins
as soon as the Jammer is immediately behind the rearmost Blocker.
7.1.5 Each pass through the pack (either initial or scoring) ends, and the next pass
begins, when the Jammer exits the front of the Engagement Zone.
7.1.5.1 If a Jammer exits the front of the Engagement Zone but is then lapped
by the pack, that Jammer returns to their previous pass until re-exiting
the front of the Engagement Zone. (See Section 7.2.2.1 for points scored
before a Jammer returns to their previous pass.)
7.1.5.2 If a Jammer falls behind and is lapped by the pack before completing
their initial pass, it will not be considered their initial pass. The Jammer’s
forward engagement of the pack on their subsequent pass will be
considered their initial pass.
7.1.5.3 Even if a Jammer is lapped by the pack more than once (as in Section
7.1.5.1 or 7.1.5.2), when they complete a pass by exiting the front of the
Engagement Zone, they will return to the pass they had been on prior to
having ever been lapped (see Section 7.1.3.5).
Page 56

7.2 POINTS
7.2.1 Points are earned when the Jammer passes each opponent, including those
who have been knocked to the floor, are out of play, or are considered to be in
the Penalty Box. Illegal passes that do not warrant a penalty also earn points for
Jammers, except where specified in Sections 5.11.5–5.11.8 - No Pass/No Penalty.
7.2.1.1 The Jammer earns a Not-On-the-Track (NOTT) point for each opponent
who is not on the track immediately upon scoring the first point on
any opposing Blocker in each scoring pass, including those opposing
Blockers who are still physically on the track but have been directed
to the Penalty Box. If the jam ends before the Jammer scores, said
additional points will not be awarded. The following are examples of
points the Jammer will earn in this manner:
7.2.1.1.1 Opponents in the Penalty Box.
7.2.1.1.2 Opponents who have been assessed a penalty sent to the
Penalty Box (even if they are still on the track).
7.2.1.1.3 Opponents who failed to be on the track when the jamstarting
whistle blew.
7.2.1.1.4 Opponents who have removed themselves from play.
7.2.1.1.4.1 Opponents who have removed themselves from
the track will be scored upon as though they
were on the track (but out of bounds) until it has
been determined they have removed themselves
from play (until they return to play, if they are
allowed; see Section 9.3.3).
7.2.1.1.5 Opponents who have returned from the Penalty Box behind
the Jammer.
7.2.1.2 Standard scoring rules and requirements apply to opponents returning
from the Penalty Box who skate ahead of the Jammer before the Jammer
is able to earn their first point in that scoring pass.
7.2.1.3 Points for opponents who have not yet been scored upon in an
incomplete scoring pass by a penalized Jammer, who themselves are
penalized while the Jammer is serving penalty time, will be awarded to
the penalized Jammer upon the Jammer’s legal in-bounds re-entry onto
the track in the same jam, or upon passing any opposing Blocker (if their
re-entry was illegal). If the jam ends before this occurs, points for those
opponents will not be awarded. The Jammer may still earn those points
by legally passing those opponents in the same jam.
7.2.2 Points are announced by hand signal once the Jammer has exited the front of the
Engagement Zone (see Section 7.1.3.5).
7.2.2.1 Once a scoring pass is complete (see Section 7.1.3.5), a Jammer cannot
score points unearned in their previous scoring pass.
Page 57

7.2.3 Points are earned until the end of the fourth whistle of the jam-ending signal.
7.2.4 If the jam ends when the Jammer is still in the pack, the points for any passed
opponents will be announced immediately.
7.2.4.1 The Jammer will also be awarded points for opposing Blockers on the
track who have advanced ahead of the Engagement Zone and have
not yet returned, if said Blockers were not previously scored upon during
that scoring pass.
7.2.5 Out of Play Points: Upon completion of a scoring pass (see Section 7.1.5), a
Jammer will score a point for every Blocker who has advanced ahead of the
Engagement Zone and not yet returned.
7.2.5.1 Only Blockers who have not yet been scored upon in that pass can be
scored upon in this manner.
7.2.5.2 If a Blocker has been scored upon in this manner, they may not be
scored upon again by being passed until they have returned to the
Engagement Zone.
7.2.6 Once a Jammer earns a point, that point can never be taken away.
7.2.6.1 Points awarded in error are points that have not been legally earned
by a Jammer and have been awarded to their team incorrectly and/or
erroneously by an Official or as the result of a technology malfunction. As
these points have not been earned, they can be revoked after they have
been awarded.
7.2.6.2 Points denied in error are points that were legally earned by a Jammer,
but have not been awarded to their team; for example, due to officiating
error or technology malfunction. As these points have been legitimately
earned, they may be bestowed after they normally would have.
7.2.6.3 If a point is awarded or denied in error, this error must be corrected prior
to the conclusion of the following jam.
7.2.6.3.1 If an error persists past the conclusion of the following jam, it
will stand as part of the Official Score. Any changes made to
the visible score during the following jam may be reviewed
(per Section 1.11 - Official Reviews) after that jam concludes,
as the score change was made during that jam, even if the
original incident occurred earlier.
7.2.6.3.2 If less than two minutes remain on the Official Period Clock
during the second period, points awarded or denied in
error must be corrected prior to the start, rather than the
conclusion, of the following jam. Officials may take Official
Timeouts as necessary to ensure that the score is correct prior
to the start of such a jam.
7.2.7 Jammers cannot score points while in the Penalty Box.
Page 58

7.2.7.1 When the Jammer finishes serving a penalty, the Jammer continues
their scoring pass exactly where the Jammer left off. For example: If the
Jammer has scored on opposing Blockers A and B when sent to the
Penalty Box, the Jammer retains those points. When the penalty finishes
in the same jam, the Jammer remains on the same scoring pass and
can only score on opposing Blockers C and D. (See Section 2.4 - Lead
Jammer for Lead Jammer details.)
7.2.7.2 A Jammer exiting the Penalty Box will still be on the same pass the
Jammer was on when the Jammer was penalized, even if all points for a
pass have been awarded. The Jammer will immediately earn points for
passing Blockers who are outside of the Engagement Zone, behind the
Jammer, upon re-entry (see Section 6.2.7.3).
7.2.7.3 When the Jammer’s penalty spans into the next jam, the Jammer starts
all of their passes over. The Jammer’s points are announced at the end of
the one jam, and in the next jam the Jammer begins their initial pass at
the jam-starting whistle.
7.2.8 Jammer Lap Point: If one Jammer completely laps the opposing Jammer while
both Jammers are on the track, the lapping Jammer will score one point.
7.2.8.1 The scoring Jammer does not need to be on a scoring pass to score a
Jammer Lap Point.
7.2.8.2 The scoring Jammer does not need to be “ahead” in terms of the number
of scoring passes completed to score a Jammer Lap Point.
7.2.8.3 NOTT Points and Jammer Lap Points are mutually exclusive per pass:
Once a Jammer has scored a Jammer Lap Point on the opposing
Jammer, the scoring Jammer cannot score a NOTT Point on the opposing
Jammer until their following pass. Conversely, if a Jammer has scored a
NOTT Point on the opposing Jammer, the scoring Jammer cannot also
score a Jammer Lap Point until they have once again completely lapped
the opposing Jammer while both Jammers are on the track.
Page 59

8 OFFICIALS
8.1 STAFFING
8.1.1 Each game will have no fewer than three skating Referees and no more than seven
Referees total. A full staff of seven Referees is strongly encouraged. It is also strongly
encouraged for at least one Referee to be WFTDA Certified.
8.1.1.1 All Referees must be on skates.
8.1.1.2 No more than four Referees will be positioned inside the track.
8.1.2 Head Referee: One Referee is designated the Head Referee. The Head Referee is
the ultimate authority. The Head Referee will assign positions and duties to the other
Referees and Non-Skating Officials as necessary.
8.1.2.1 The Head Referee is the only Referee with the authority to expel a
Skater, manager, or coach. All other Referees and Officials must make
recommendations to the Head Referee if they observe actions that
warrant expulsion (see Section 6.4.2.1).
8.1.3 Jammer Referees: Two Referees are responsible for observing Jammers, one per team.
8.1.3.1 Jammer Referees wear an identifier (wrist band, sash, helmet cover, etc.)
corresponding to team colors to indicate the team for which the Referee
is responsible.
8.1.3.2 At the end of a period, the Jammer Referees switch the team for which
they are responsible and the identifier corresponding to each team.
8.1.4 Pack Referees: The remaining Referees observe the pack.
8.1.4.1 No more than two Pack Referees will be stationed inside the track.
8.1.5 Non-Skating Officials (NSOs)
8.1.5.1 Scorekeepers: A game will have at least two Scorekeepers. The
Scorekeepers record the points reported by the Jammer Referees and
report the score to the Scoreboard Operator.
8.1.5.2 Penalty Trackers: A game will have at least one Penalty Tracker. The
Penalty Tracker records the penalties reported by Referees and keeps
track of the Official Penalty Tally.
8.1.5.3 Penalty Timing Officials: A game will have at least two Officials to oversee
the Penalty Box. The Penalty Timing Officials time penalties and assist
Referees in ensuring a team skates short when they ought.
8.1.5.4 Scoreboard Operator: A game will have one Scoreboard Operator. The
Scoreboard Operator posts the score from the Scorekeepers, and keeps
the Official Period Clock, Jam Clock, and Score up-to-date. 
Page 60

8.1.5.5 Jam Timer: A game will have one Jam Timer. The Jam Timer is responsible
for starting jams and for timing 30 seconds between jams. The Jam Timer
is also responsible for ending jams that run the full two minutes.
8.2 DUTIES
8.2.1 Assessing team readiness for each jam
8.2.1.1 The Referees are responsible for determining that both teams have the
correct number of Skaters in the jam, taking into account Skaters in the
Penalty Box. (See Section 5.13.3 for details on starting with too many
Skaters.)
8.2.1.1.1 If the jam starts with too many Skaters, the Referees must
direct the last Blocker who entered to leave the track. If that
Skater cannot be identified, the Blocker who is closest to the
Referee must be directed off the track.
8.2.1.1.2 If the jam starts with too many Skaters, and the extra Skater
cannot be directed off the track, the Referee must stop the jam.
The extra Skater should be penalized according to Section
5.13.12.
8.2.1.1.2.1 If another teammate, who was not directed to
leave, leaves the track in order to maintain the
correct number of Skaters, the jam may continue
and no penalty will be issued.
8.2.1.2 The Referees will ensure that the Skaters are wearing all required safety
equipment, the correct uniforms, and the correct Skater designations.
8.2.1.3 The Referees will determine that the Skaters are in the proper formation.
8.2.2 Signaling Jam Starts
8.2.2.1 The Officials will whistle the start of the pack and Jammers.
8.2.3 Assigning and Communicating Lead Jammer Status
8.2.3.1 The Referees determine who has earned Lead Jammer status. The
Jammer Referee indicates Lead Jammer status with the Official Hand
Signal, by blowing two short whistle blasts, and by pointing at the Lead
Jammer.
8.2.3.2 The Jammer Referee will continue pointing to the Lead Jammer for the
duration of the jam.
8.2.4 The Jammer Referees are responsible for counting and signaling the score
according to the guidelines laid out in Section 7 - Scoring. They must communicate
this score (per Section 7.2.2) after the Jammer completes each scoring pass.
Page 61

8.2.5 Safety is the number one priority for Referees. Illegal game play that causes an
unsafe environment is not to be tolerated. The Referees are to assess and enforce
penalties and expulsions as described in Section 5 - Penalties and Section 6 - Penalty
Enforcement. Referees will use their discretion and their decisions are binding.
8.2.5.1 Referees will use all officially designated hand signals as means to
properly communicate to Scorekeepers/Penalty Trackers, Skaters,
announcers, and fellow Referees (see WFTDA Official Hand Signals for
approved hand signals).
8.2.5.2 Referees will:
8.2.5.2.1 Whistle, hand signal, and vocally call out all penalties at a
volume sufficient for Skaters and Officials to hear.
8.2.5.2.2 Exclusively use a Skater’s team color and roster number for
referring to that Skater (for example, calling penalties on the
Skater). Other systems, including officiating numbers, legal
names, charter names, or abbreviated numbers, may not be
used, even for communication solely amongst Officials.
8.2.6 A Referee calls off a jam with four short whistle blasts.
8.2.6.1 A Referee may call off a jam for any of the following reasons:
8.2.6.1.1 Referees call an Official Timeout.
8.2.6.1.2 Injury: Referees will only call off a jam in the case of a serious
injury or an injury that could endanger another Skater.
8.2.6.1.3 Technical difficulty or mechanical malfunctions (including
equipment and skate malfunctions).
8.2.6.1.4 In response to commission of a penalty that impacts the
game (see Section 6.1.3).
8.2.6.1.5 Any Skater is unduly interfered with by spectators.
8.2.6.1.6 Emergency.
8.2.6.1.7 Disruption of the skating surface (debris or spills).
8.2.6.1.8 Too many Skaters on the track. After the jam has started,
Referees will expeditiously direct any extra Skaters so that the
jam does not have to be called off (see Section 8.2.6.2.6).
8.2.6.2 A Referee must call off a jam for any of the following reasons:
8.2.6.2.1 Lead Jammer calls off the jam by repeatedly placing their
hands on their hips.
8.2.6.2.2 End of two-minute jam clock or the end of the period’s final jam.
8.2.6.2.3 An injury that is a safety hazard to continued game play.
Page 62

8.2.6.2.4 Fighting.
8.2.6.2.5 Technical difficulty or mechanical malfunction (including
equipment and skate malfunctions) that is a safety hazard to
continued play.
8.2.6.2.6 Too many Skaters on the track that gives that team a
competitive advantage.
8.2.6.2.7 Venue malfunctions (including power outages) that are a
safety hazard to continued play.
8.2.6.2.8 Physical interference (including audience members on the
track) that interferes with continued play.
8.2.6.3 In the event that any jam (including an overtime jam) is called off prior to
its natural conclusion (for example, as in Sections 8.2.6.1.2–8.2.6.1.8) with
time remaining on the jam clock but not on the period clock, the points
from the jam will remain and an additional jam may occur at the Head
Referee’s discretion. Such a jam will follow the same rules as the prior jam.
If the prior jam was an overtime jam, the additional jam will also be an
overtime jam (Section 1.6 - Overtime), whether or not the jam that ended
unnaturally resulted in a tie score (and vice versa).
8.2.7 Declaring a Forfeit
8.2.7.1 The Head Referee may call a forfeit for the following reasons:
8.2.7.1.1 A team has five or fewer Skaters still eligible to participate in
the game.
8.2.7.1.2 A team that, after a warning, refuses to field Skaters on the
track to continue play.
8.2.7.2 The Head Referee must call a forfeit for the following reasons:
8.2.7.2.1 A team fails to show up.
8.2.7.2.2 A team elects to forfeit rather than continue play.
8.2.8 Referees may break up fights at their discretion and play will resume as quickly
as possible.
8.2.9 Referees have the option of calling an Official Timeout if they feel that there is a
situation that would interfere with the safety of the Skaters or audience members, or
that would interfere with proper game play.
8.2.10 In the event that there is a disagreement regarding a Referee’s call or scoring,
only the Captains or their Designated Alternates may discuss the ruling with the
Referees. Skaters, coaches, or managers may act as Designated Alternates.
Page 63

8.3 OFFICIATING DISCRETION
8.3.1 The consensus of the Officials will be the final decision on any disputed point that
is not clearly spelled out in these rules. An Official may increase the severity of
a penalty at their discretion. Similarly, an Official may decrease the severity of a
penalty to a warning as the Official sees fit.
8.3.1.1 A warning does not have to be issued in order for a penalty to be given.
The exception to this is Out of Play penalties for failure to reform and
failure to return, before which warnings must be given. (See Sections
5.10.4, 5.10.5, 5.10.11, and 5.10.12 for exceptions.)
8.3.1.2 Officiating discretion is intended only to allow Officials to keep the game
safe, fair, and consistent in the event that an unexpected situation arises.
Discretion does not allow Officials to change rules.
8.3.2 If an Official is in doubt on a call (e.g., they see the effects of a hit but do not see
the action), a penalty must not be called.
8.3.3 If an Official is in a position where intent must be inferred but is not clear, legal
intent must be presumed
8.3.4 If an Official is not sure whether an action warrants a penalty, a penalty will not be
assessed.
8.3.5 If an Official is not sure whether an action warrants an expulsion, an expulsion will
not be assessed.
8.3.6 When an Official provides erroneous information to a Skater, the Skater will not be
penalized for actions taken based on that information (see, for example, Sections
5.13.2 and 5.13.5).
8.3.7 The Head Referee may designate NSOs to signal and enforce penalties in situations
in which said NSOs are able to observe the penalty. This includes, but is not limited
to, obscene, profane, or abusive language directed at said NSOs or another Official
(see Section 5.16.10); removal of safety equipment while in the Penalty Box (see
Section 5.13.11); Penalty Box violations (see Sections 5.13.9, 5.13.10, 5.13.11, and
5.13.20); and Delay of Game penalties (see Section 5.15).
8.3.7.1 The Head Referee may designate which NSOs are empowered to call
penalties, as well as which penalties said NSOs are empowered to call,
and the manner in which said penalties are enforced.
8.3.7.1.2 NSOs may only be designated to call penalties pursuant to
their officiating role, to their person, or to those around them.
For example, no NSO may be designated to call penalties
that involve blocks or assists.
8.3.7.2 NSOs who are empowered to call penalties in this manner are bound by
the same requirements as Referees, per Section 8.3 - Officiating Discretion.
Page 64

8.4 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT
8.4.1 Referees are permitted to wear inline skates, but are strongly encouraged to wear
quad skates.
8.4.2 Referees must be uniformed in a manner that makes them easily identifiable as the
Officials for the game (e.g., a black and white striped shirt).
8.4.2.1 NSOs are strongly encouraged to dress in an un-obtrusive uniform
differentiating themselves from Referees.
8.4.3 Each Referee participating in a game must be visibly and clearly identified on the
back of their jersey. A Referee may use any of the following as identification:
8.4.3.1 Name.
8.4.3.2 Number: If a Referee chooses to wear a number, that number must be a
numeral of no more than four digits (i.e., it may not contain letters and
symbols, regardless of their size).
8.4.3.3 Both name and number.
8.4.4 Each Referee will provide a working regulated sports whistle that will aid in the
appropriate whistles for jam play and calling penalties. Fox 40 Classic
strongly encouraged.
8.4.5 Safety Gear: Referees are required to wear the following safety equipment with hard
protective shells or inserts in addition to that which is required as a minimum by the
liability insurer:
8.4.5.1 Helmet
8.4.5.2 Knee pads
8.4.5.3 Wrist guards
8.4.5.4 Elbow pads
Page 65

9 SAFETY
9.1 PROTECTIVE GEAR
9.1.1 Protective gear must be worn while skating in a jam, including to and from the
Penalty Box. Failure to wear required protective gear or removal of protective gear,
such as a mouth guard, will result in a penalty (see Sections 5.13.22 and 6.2.6).
9.1.2 Protective gear must include, at a minimum: wrist guards, elbow pads, knee pads,
mouth guards, and helmets.
9.1.2.1 Wrist guards, elbow pads, knee pads, and helmets must have a hard
protective shell or inserts.
9.1.2.2 Skaters are strongly encouraged to secure or tape down loose Velcro
on pads.
9.1.3 Optional protective gear such as padded shorts, chin guards, knee or ankle
support, shin guards, turtle shell bras, protective cups, tailbone protectors, non-formfitting
clear full-face shields, non-form-fitting clear half-face shields, and form-fitting
face shields such as nose guards may be worn at the Skaters’ discretion as long as
they do not impair or interfere with the safety or play of other Skaters, support staff,
or Officials.
9.1.3.1 Chin guards, turtle shell bras, cups, tailbone protectors, shin guards,
non-form-fitting clear full-face shields, non-form-fitting clear half-face
shields, and form-fitting face shields such as nose guards may have a
hard protective shell. No other optional protective gear may have hard
protective shells.
9.1.3.2 Cage-style face shields are not permitted.
9.1.3.3 Non-form-fitting full- and half-face shields must be designed for use on
the brand and type of helmet with which they are paired.
9.2 SAFETY PERSONNEL
9.2.1 The hosting team must provide at least two licensed or certified medical
professionals with expertise in emergency and urgent medical care. These
medical professionals will supply the necessary equipment and supplies to
handle such injuries or conditions as can be reasonably expected to occur at a
roller derby game. The medical professionals will be present during the entire warm
up and game.
9.2.2 Captains are responsible for supplying medical personnel with their Skaters’
medical and/or emergency contact information as necessary.
Page 66

9.3 INJURED SKATERS
9.3.1 If a Skater sustains an injury serious enough that the Referees call off the jam, the
Skater must sit out the next three jams.
9.3.1.1 If more than one jam is called off for the same Skater, the Skater must sit
out of the remainder of the period.
9.3.2 If a Skater is bleeding, the Skater may not participate in the game until the bleeding
has stopped.
9.3.3 If a Skater leaves the jam during play for equipment issues, the Skater may return to
the jam once the issue has been resolved. If the Skater leaves the jam for injury or
any other reason, the Skater may not return to the jam.
9.3.3.1 A Skater who leaves the track due to equipment issues must return to the
pack from the back and is subject to penalties per Section 5.13 - Illegal
Procedures.
9.3.4 Skaters who are injured prior to the game may play if they have received clearance
from their doctor.
9.3.4.1 A Skater may not wear an appliance, cast, or brace that causes a
danger to other Skaters (as determined by the Head Referee).
9.4 IMPAIRED SKATERS
9.4.1 Skaters may not participate in a game while under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics, or illegal drugs.
9.4.2 Skaters may not consume alcohol at games while wearing skates.
10 GLOSSARY
Some words or concepts used in this ruleset hold a specific or technical meaning. Those are
defined in this section. Any words used in the rules that are not defined herein should be treated
as colloquial use. If more than one reasonable interpretation of a colloquial term exists that has
measurable impact on the game, it will be determined by consensus of the Referees for that game
(see Section 8.3).
Apex Jump An attempt to legally shorten the distance travelled around
the curve of the track by leaping over the track boundary and
landing back in bounds.
Assist Physically affecting a teammate. Examples include, but are not
limited to, a push or a whip.
Blocker The positional Skaters who form the pack. The Pivot Blocker is
one of the four Blockers per team allowed in each jam (see
Section 2.1 - Blocker).
Blocking to the Back Any contact to the back of the torso, buttocks, or legs of an
opponent. It is not considered Blocking to the Back if the
Blocker is positioned behind the opponent (as demarcated by
the hips) but makes contact to a legal target zone.
Blocking Zones Areas of the body that may be used to hit an opponent when
performing a block. (See Figure 2 in Section 4 - Blocking for
legal vs. illegal blocking zones.)
Captain The Skater identified to speak for the team. Only the Captain
and the Designated Alternate may confer with the Referees
(see Section 8.2.10). If the Captain must leave the game, they
can transfer their status to a teammate.
Counter-Block Any motion/movement toward an oncoming block by the
receiving opponent designed to counteract an opponent’s
block. Counter-blocking is treated as blocking and held to
the same standards and rules. Standing up, turning away,
ducking, etc., are not considered counter-blocking
(see Section 4 - Blocking).
Designated Alternate The Captain selects an additional person to act in their
stead; this person is the Designated Alternate. The Designated
Alternate may be a teammate, coach, or manager. They must
be one of the 16 individuals described in Section 1.2.4. A team
may only have one Designated Alternate. 
Down Skaters are considered down if they have fallen, been knocked
to the ground, have either or both knees on the ground, or
have both hands on the ground. After going down or falling, a
Skater is considered down until the Skater is standing, stepping,
and/or skating. Stationary standing Skaters are not considered
down, nor are Skaters who are falling but have not yet met the
above criteria.
Engagement Zone The zone in which Blockers may legally engage and be
engaged. The Engagement Zone extends from 20 feet (6
meters) behind the rearmost pack Skater to 20 feet (6 meters)
in front of the foremost pack Skater, between the inside and
outside track boundaries. Jammers may engage each other
outside of the Engagement Zone.
Engaging Any sort of interaction with another Skater on the track during
a jam (see also Assist and Section 4 - Blocking).
Established Position Where a Skater is physically; an area of the track where the
Skater has secured their place. Examples: up, in bounds, down,
out of bounds, in play, and/or out of play.
Expulsion Removal by the Head Referee of a Skater from the remainder
of the game for a serious illegal action, such as physical
violence or any action deemed by the Officials to cause
an extraordinary physical threat to others (see Section 6.4 -
Expulsion and Fouling Out, and Section 5 - Penalties).
Fall Small A Skater is said to have “fallen small” if they fall with the arms
and legs controlled, tucked into the body, and not flailing.
Fouling Out Removal, by the Head Referee, of a Skater from the remainder
of the game for excessive turns served in the Penalty Box (see
Section 6.4 - Expulsion and Fouling Out).
Grasping Physically holding onto something with a clenched fist. For
example, grabbing a teammate’s uniform or holding hands.
The grasping Skater’s arm, from the hand up to (but not
including) the shoulder is considered to be part of the “grasp.”
The teammate is not considered part of the grasp, unless the
teammate is independently grasping.
Habitual Any behavior that occurs three or more times over the course
of a game.
Hips The laterally-projecting prominence of the pelvis or pelvic
region from the waist to the thigh. The central point of this area
determines a pass, regardless of the direction the Skater is
facing.
Illegal Procedure A technical infraction that gives the offending team an
advantage but does not directly impact a specific opponent.
Immediately The first legal opportunity in which a Skater may complete
an action.
Impenetrable A Skater or set of teammates is considered impenetrable
from a certain direction when, to achieve a pass on one or
more of the Skaters, an opponent would need to physically
break said teammates’ bones or joints. The parts that would
need to be physically broken in order to pass are considered
the “impenetrable” parts. For example, if two teammates are
skating forwards with their arms around each others’ backs,
the arms constitute an impenetrable wall, so that an opponent
could not pass between the pair without breaking said arms.
In Bounds A Skater is in bounds at the beginning of the jam if they are
in position at the beginning of the jam (see Section 3.2 -
Pre-Jam Positioning). A Skater remains in bounds until they
adopt a straddling or out-of-bounds position. Once out of
bounds or straddling, a Skater is considered to be in bounds
again once all parts of the Skater that are touching the ground
are touching within the track boundary.
In Play When a Blocker is in bounds and upright within the
Engagement Zone, the Blocker is in play. Jammers are always
in play (so long as they are in bounds and upright).
In Position When a Skater is on the track, in bounds, and in the
designated area for their position, when the jam-starting
whistle is blown (see Section 3.2 - Pre-Jam Positioning).
Inactive Jammer A Skater designated as the Jammer who is not wearing the
Jammer helmet cover in such a way that the stars are visible
(see Section 2.3 - Jammer).
Initial Pass The first pass a Jammer makes through the pack (see Section
7.1.4 - Pass and Scoring Pass). No points are scored on
this pass; the exceptions being Jammer Lap Points and
during overtime.
Initiator of the Assist The Skater who reaches for, grabs, and/or pushes a teammate
in order to help that teammate. A Skater may also take an
assist off of a teammate’s body, and would be initiating their
own assist.
Initiator of the Block The Skater who makes contact with a target zone of an
opponent is the initiator of the block. The initiator of a block is
always responsible for the legality of the contact.
Insubordination Willfully or neglectfully failing to comply with a Referee’s orders.
Wrongful or improper behavior motivated by intentional
disregard for the rules (see Section 5.14 - Insubordination).
Jam The basic unit of play for the game (see Section 1 -
Game Parameters).
Jammer The point scorer for the team. The Jammer is identified by stars
on the helmet cover (see Section 2.3 - Jammer).
Jammer Lap Point If one Jammer completely laps the opposing Jammer while
both Jammers are on the track, that lapping Jammer will
score an additional point each time the Jammer fully laps
that opposing Jammer. Exceptions occur when the opposing
Jammer is not on the track (see Section 7.2.7).
Lap A complete pass through the pack; this may require more than
one trip around the track.
Lead Jammer A strategic position established on the Jammers’ initial pass
through the pack during each jam. The Lead Jammer is the
first Jammer to pass the foremost in-play Blocker legally and in
bounds, having already passed all other Blockers legally and
in bounds (see Section 2.4 - Lead Jammer).
Linking Interlocking of arms via crooking of an elbow. Both Skaters’
arms, up to (but not including) the shoulder are considered to
be part of the “link.”
Low Block Any contact below the legal blocking or target zone that
causes the recipient to stumble or fall (see Section 5.3 - Low
Blocking).
Misconduct Wrongful or improper behavior motivated by intentional
purpose or obstinate indifference to the rules.
Multi-Player Block Impeding an opponent from passing between a Skater and
their teammate (see Section 5.7 - Multi-Player Blocks).
No Impact/No Penalty A violation of the rules of the game that has limited impact on
safety or game play, and does not warrant the Skater to spend
time in the Penalty Box.
No Pack A situation in which no pack can be defined. This occurs when
there is not a group of Blockers (from both teams) skating
within proximity to each other or when there are two or more
equally numbered groups of Blockers not skating within
proximity to each other (see Proximity).
Not-On-the-Track Point (NOTT Point) A point given for an opponent who is not on the track that the
Jammer earns immediately upon scoring the first point on any
opposing Blocker in each scoring pass (see Section 7.2.1.1).
Officiating Number Any sort of shortened or otherwise modified version
of a Skater’s roster number, used in order to facilitate
communication amongst Officials.
Out of Bounds A Skater is out of bounds when part of the Skater’s body
or equipment is touching the ground beyond the track
boundary, including both arms or hands (one arm or hand
does not render a Skater out of bounds), or any part below the
Skater’s waist (e.g., a knee, a skate, or a hip). Skaters who are
airborne maintain their prior in-bounds (or out-of-bounds, or
straddling) status until they land. Skaters who are straddling are
considered out of bounds, except where otherwise noted.
Out of Play A Blocker who is in bounds, but positioned outside of the
Engagement Zone. If no pack is defined, all Blockers are Out
of Play. When a Jammer is out of bounds, they are Out of Play
(see Section 3.3 - Jam Positioning).
Pack The largest group of in-bounds Blockers, skating or standing in
proximity, containing members from both teams. The Jammers
are independent of this definition (see also Proximity).
Pack Skater Any Blocker who is part of a legally defined pack.
Pass (noun) A pass begins with the Jammer behind the pack and ends
when the Jammer has cleared the Engagement Zone. The
Jammer is immediately considered to be on their next pass
once they have cleared the front of the Engagement Zone
(see Scoring Pass and Initial Pass), if one exists, or immediately
upon passing the foremost Blocker if there is no pack.
Pass (verb) To end up in front of a Skater, such that the passer’s hips went
from being behind to being in front of the other Skater’s hips
(see Scoring Pass and Initial Pass).
Passing the Star (a.k.a., Star Pass) The act of transferring Jammer status, which is accomplished
by the Jammer handing their helmet cover (the Star) to the
Pivot (see Section 2.5 - Passing the Star).
Penalty A violation of the rules of the game requiring the Skater to
serve time in the Penalty Box due to commission of such
a violation (see Section 5 - Penalties).
Pivot Blocker Commonly referred to as the Pivot. A Blocker, as defined in
Section 2.1 - Blocker, with extra abilities and responsibilities as
outlined in Section 2.2 - Pivot Blocker.
Point of No Return The far edge of the Penalty Box, in the counter-clockwise
direction (see Section 6.2.2.1.1), including its projection across
the track.
Points Awarded in Error Points that have not been legally earned by a Jammer
and have been awarded to the team incorrectly and/or
erroneously by an Official or as the result of a technology
malfunction (see Section 7.2.6).
Points Denied in Error Similar to Points Awarded in Error, Points Denied in Error are
points that have been legally earned by a Jammer but have
not been added to the Official Score due to delay, an error by
an Official, or as the result of a technology malfunction. (See
Section 7.2.6).
Positional Blocking Blocking without contact; positioning oneself so as to impede
an opponent’s movement on the track. It may also be done
unintentionally if the blocking Skater is not aware of the
opponent’s position behind the blocking Skater.
Proximity A measure of distance for in-play Skaters that is defined as
skating not more than 10 feet (3 meters) in front of or behind
the nearest pack Skater.
Re-Pass The act of passing an opponent who has already been
passed during the current lap. If the Jammer drops back
behind an opponent who the Jammer passed illegally, by
being reengaged or repositioning, the Jammer may attempt to
pass the opponent again legally.
Relative Position A Skater’s location, when in bounds and upright, in relation
to other Skaters involved in the action. Relative position is
said to be “gained” or “lost” if said location changes in a way
that gives or loses some advantage (for example, one Skater
passing another, or being knocked down, out of bounds, or out
of play). Relative position is only measured in the counterclockwise
direction.
Roster A list of Skaters for a team, and their identifying numbers, who
are eligible to play in the game.
Scoring Pass Any pass a Jammer makes through the pack after the
completed initial pass. Points may only be earned on scoring
passes. A Jammer Lap Point is independent of this definition
(see Section 7.1 - Passes; Pass; and Initial Pass).
Sitting A Skater whose buttocks are in full contact with the seat of a
chair or bench.
Skating Using one’s skates to move. This can include stepping in any
direction, rolling, and sliding on the wheels, as well as stepping
in any direction and/or sliding on the toe stops.
Slide Tackling A Skater who leaps and/or slides and extends their leg(s) or
arm(s) in order to disrupt the movement of an opponent’s feet
and/or legs.
Standing A Skater who is upright holding their body weight on their
skates. When a Skater is told to stand in the Penalty Box, the
Skater must stand fully erect and cannot maintain a crouched
or hovering position over the seat. It must be clear to all
Officials and spectators that the seat is now available for
a teammate to occupy.
Stopped A Skater not making any directional movement with their skates.
Straddling Skater A Skater who is partially touching inside the track boundary
line, and also partially outside. Straddling Skaters are
considered “out of bounds,” except where otherwise noted.
Substitution Replacing a Skater on the track or in the Penalty Box with
a teammate.
The Star The Jammer helmet cover, which has two stars on it, one on
each side.
Target Zones Areas of the body on an opponent that a Skater may hit when
performing a block (see Figure 2 in Section 4 - Blocking for
legal vs. illegal target zones).
Upright Any Skater who is not considered “down” (see Down).
Warning A formal verbal indication from the Referee that play is
improper and that a Skater must take corrective action.
